alice+jonathan+prince+farm+dragonboy

CHAPTER I. Down the Rabbit-Hole

Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, 'and what is the use of a book,' thought Alice 'without pictures or conversation?'

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, 'Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!' (when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled 'ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

'Well!' thought Alice to herself, 'after such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'll all think me at home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off the top of the house!' (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! 'I wonder how many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud. 'I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, I think' (for, you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) '-yes, that's about the right distance-but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I've got to?' (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. 'I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH the earth! How funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think-' (she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) '-but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried to curtsey as she spoke-fancy CURTSEYING as you're falling through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) 'And what an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again. 'Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I should think!' (Dinah was the cat.) 'I hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?' And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, 'Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, 'Do bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question, it didn't much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, 'Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, 'Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it's getting!' She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway; 'and even if my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, 'it would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only know how to begin.' For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, ('which certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words 'DRINK ME' beautifully printed on it in large letters.

It was all very well to say 'Drink me,' but the wise little Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry. 'No, I'll look first,' she said, 'and see whether it's marked \"poison\" or not'; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 'poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked 'poison,' so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

'What a curious feeling!' said Alice; 'I must be shutting up like a telescope.'

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; 'for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, 'in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?' And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.

'Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to herself, rather sharply; 'I advise you to leave off this minute!' She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people. 'But it's no use now,' thought poor Alice, 'to pretend to be two people! Why, there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!'

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words 'EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants. 'Well, I'll eat it,' said Alice, 'and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I'll get into the garden, and I don't care which happens!'

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, 'Which way? Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

    Richard Bach. Jonathan Livingston Seagull



                                             To the real Jonathan Seagull,
                                             who lives within us all.


    Part One



     It was morning, and the new sun sparkled gold across the ripples of a
gentle sea. A mile from shore a fishing boat chummed the  water.  and  the
word for Breakfast Flock flashed through  the  air,  till  a  crowd  of  a
thousand seagulls came to dodge and fight for bits of food. It was another
busy day beginning.
     But way off alone, out by himself beyond  boat  and  shore,  Jonathan
Livingston Seagull was practicing. A hundred feet in the  sky  he  lowered
his webbed feet, lifted his beak, and strained  to  hold  a  painful  hard
twisting curve through his wings.  The  curve  meant  that  he  would  fly
slowly, and now he slowed until the wind was a whisper in his face,  until
the ocean stood  still  beneath  him.  He  narrowed  his  eyes  in  fierce
concentration, held his breath, forced one...  single...  more...  inch...
of... curve... Then his featliers ruffled, he stalled and fell.
     Seagulls, as you know, never falter, never stall. To stall in the air
is for them disgrace and it is dishonor.
     But Jonathan Livingston  Seagull,  unashamed,  stretching  his  wings
again in that trembling hard curve - slowing, slowing, and  stalling  once
more - was no ordinary bird.
     Most gulls don't bother to learn more  than  the  simplest  facts  of
flight - how to get from shore to food and back again. For most gulls,  it
is not flying that matters, but eating. For this gull, though, it was  not
eating that mattered,  but  flight.  More  than  anything  else.  Jonathan
Livingston Seagull loved to fly.
     This kind of thinking, he found, is not the way to  make  one's  self
popular with other birds. Even his parents were dismayed as Jonathan spent
whole days alone, making hundreds of low-level glides, experimenting.


     He didn't know why, for instance, but when he flew at altitudes  less
than half his wingspan above the water, he could stay in the  air  longer,
with less effort. His glides ended not with  the  usual  feet-down  splash
into the sea, but with a long flat wake as he touched the surface with his
feet tightly streamlined against his body. When he  began  sliding  in  to
feet-up landings on the beach, then pacing the length of his slide in  the
sand, his parents were very much dismayed indeed.
     "Why, Jon, why?" his mother asked. "Why is it so hard to be like  the
rest of the flock, Jon? Why can't you leave low flying  to  the  pelicans,
the alhatross? Why don't you eat? Son, you're bone and feathers!"
     "I don't mind being bone and feathers mom. I just want to know what I
can do in the air and what I can't, that's all. I just want to know."
     "See here Jonathan " said his father not unkindly. "Winter isn't  far
away. Boats will be few and the surface fish will be swimming deep. If you
must study, then study food, and how to get it. This  flying  business  is
all very well, but you can't eat a glide, you know. Don't you forget  that
the reason you fly is to eat."
     Jonathan nodded obediently. For the next few days he tried to  behave
like the other gulls; he really tried, screeching and  fighting  with  the
flock around the piers and fishing boats, diving on  scraps  of  fish  and
bread. But he couldn't make it work.
     It's all so pointless, he thought, deliberately dropping  a  hard-won
anchovy to a hungry old gull chasing him. I could  be  spending  all  this
time learning to fly. There's so much to learn!


     It wasn't long before Jonathan Gull was off by himself again, far out
at sea, hungry, happy, learning.
     The subject was speed, and in a week's practice he learned more about
speed than the fastest gull alive.
     From a thousand feet, flapping his wings as  hard  as  he  could,  he
pushed over into a blazing steep dive toward the waves,  and  learned  why
seagulls don't make blazing steep pewer-dives. In just six seconds he  was
moving seventy miles per hour, the speed at which one's wing goes unstable
on the upstroke.
     Time after time it happened. Careful as he was, working at  the  very
peak of his ability, he lost control at high speed.
     Climb to a thousand feet. Full power straight ahead first, then  push
over, flapping, to a vertical  dive.  Then,  every  time,  his  left  wing
stalled on an upstroke, he'd roll violently left,  stall  his  right  wing
recovering, and flick like fire into a wild tumbling spin to the right.
     He couldn't be careful enough on that upstroke. Ten times  he  tried,
and all ten times, as he passed through seventy miles per hour,  he  burst
into a churning mass of feathers, out of control, crashing down  into  the
water.
     The key, he thought at last, dripping wet, must be to hold the  wings
still at high speeds - to flap up to fifty and then hold the wings still.
     From two thousand feet he tried again, rolling into  his  dive,  beak
straight down, wings full out and stable from the moment he  passed  fifty
miles per hour. It took tremendous strength, but it worked. In ten seconds
he had blurred through ninety miles per hour. Jonathan  had  set  a  world
speed record for seagulls!
     But victory was short-lived. The instant he began  his  pullout,  the
instant he changed the angle of his  wings,  he  snapped  into  that  same
terrible uncontrolled disaster, and at ninety miles per hour  it  hit  him
like dynamite. Jonathan Seagull exploded in midair and smashed down into a
brickhard sea.
     When he came to, it was well after dark, and he floated in  moonlight
on the surface of the ocean. His wings were ragged bars of lead,  but  the
weight of failure was even heavier on his back. He  wished,  feebly,  that
the weight could be just enough to drug him gently down to the bottom, and
end it all.
     As he sank low in the water, a strange hollow  voice  sounded  within
him. There's no way around it. I am a seagull. I am limited by my  nature.
If I were meant to learn so much about flying, I'd have charts for brains.
If I were meant to fly at speed, I'd have a falcon's short wings, and live
on mice instead  of  fish.  My  father  was  right.  I  must  forget  this
foolishness. I must fly home to the Flock and be content as  I  am,  as  a
poor limited seagull.
     The voice faded, and Jonathan agreed. The  place  for  a  seagull  at
night is on shore, and from this moment forth, he vowed,  he  would  be  a
normal gull. It would make everyone happier.
     He pushed wearily away from the dark water and flew toward the  land,
grateful for what he had learned about work-saving low-altitude flying.
     But no, he thought. I am done with the way I  was,  I  am  done  with
everything I learned. I am a seagull like every other seagull, and I  will
fly like one. So he climbed painfully to a hundred feet  and  flapped  his
wings harder, pressing for shore.
     He felt better for his decision to be just another one of the  Flock.
There would be no ties now to the force that  had  driven  him  to  learn,
there would be no more challenge and no more failure. And it  was  pretty,
just to stop thinking, and fly through the dark, toward the  lights  above
the beach.
     Dark! The hollow voice cracked in alarm. Seagulls never  fly  in  the
dark!
     Jonathan was not alert to listen. It's pretty, he thought.  The  moon
and the lights twinkling on the water, throwing out  little  beacon-trails
through the night, and all so peaceful and still...
     Get down! Seagulls never fly in the dark! If you were meant to fly in
the dark, you'd have the eyes of an owl! You'd  have  charts  for  brains!
You'd have a falcon's short wings!
     There in the night, a hundred feet in the  air,  Jonathan  Livingston
Seagull - blinked. His pain, his resolutions, vanished.
     Short wings. A falcon's short wings!
     That's the answer! What a fool I've been! All I need is a tiny little
wing, all I need is to fold most of my wings and  fly  on  just  the  tips
alone! Short wings!
     He climbed two thousand feet above  the  black  sea,  and  without  a
moment for thought of failure and death, he brought his forewings  tightly
in to his body, left  only  the  narrow  swept  daggers  of  his  wingtips
extended into the wind, and fell into a vertical dive.
     The wind was a monster roar at his  head.  Seventy  miles  per  hour,
ninety, a hundred and twenty and faster still. The wing-strain  now  at  a
hundred and forty miles per hour wasn't nearly as  hard  as  it  had  been
before at seventy, and with the faintest twist of his  wingtips  he  eased
out of the dive and shot above the waves,  a  gray  cannonball  under  the
moon.
     He closed his eyes to slits against the wind and rejoiced. A  hundred
forty miles per hour! And under control! If I dive from five thousand feet
instead of two thousand, I wonder how fast..
     His vows of a moment before were forgotten, swept away in that  great
swift wind. Yet he felt guiltless,  breaking  the  promises  he  had  made
himself. Such promises are only for the gulls that  accept  the  ordinary.
One who has touched excellence in his learning has no need of that kind of
promise.
     By sunup, Jonathan Gull was practicing again. From five thousand feet
the fishing boats were specks in the flat blue water, Breakfast Flock  was
a faint cloud of dust motes, circling.
     He was alive, trembling ever so slightly with delight, proud that his
fear was under control. Then without ceremony he hugged in his  forewings,
extended his short, angled wingtips, and plunged direcfly toward the  sea.
By the time he passed four thousand feet he had reached terminal velocity,
the wind was a solid beating wall of sound against which he could move  no
faster. He was flying now straight down, at two hundred fourteen miles per
hour. He swallowed, knowing that if his wings unfolded at that speed  be'd
be blown into a million tiny shreds of seagull. But the speed  was  power,
and the speed was joy, and the speed was pure beauty.
     He began his pullout  at  a  thousand  feet,  wingtips  thudding  and
blurring in that gigatitic wind, the boat and the crowd of  gulls  tilting
and growing meteor-fast, directly in his path.
     He couldn't stop; he didn't know yet even how to turn at that speed.
     Collision would be instant death.
     And so he shut his eyes.
     It happened that morning, then, just  after  sunrise,  that  Ionathan
Livingston Seagull fired directly through the center of  Breakfast  Flock,
ticking off two hundred twelve miles per hour, eyes  closed,  in  a  great
roaring shriek of wind and feathers. The Gull of Fortune smiled  upon  him
this once, and no one was killed.
     By the time he had pulled his beak straight up into the  sky  he  was
still scorching along at a hundred and sixty miles per hour. When  he  had
slowed to twenty and stretched his wings again at last,  the  boat  was  a
crumb on the sea, four thousand feet below.
     His thought was triumph. Terminal velocity! A seagull at two  hundred
fourteen miles per hour! It was a breakthrough, the greatest single moment
in the history of the Flock, and in that  moment  a  new  age  opened  for
Jonathan Gull. Flying out to his lonely practice area, folding  his  wings
for a dive from eight thousand feet, he set himself at  once  to  discover
how to turn.
     A single wingtip feather, he found, moved  a  fraction  of  an  inch,
gives a smooth sweeping curve at tremendous speed. Before he learned this,
however, he found that moving more than one feather  at  that  speed  will
spin you like a ritIe ball... and Jonathan had flown the first  aerobatics
of any seagull on earth.
     He spared no time that day for talk with other  gulls,  but  flew  on
past sunset. He discovered the loop, the slow roll, the  point  roll,  the
inverted spin, the gull bunt, the pinwheel.


     When Jonathan Seagull joined the Flock on  the  beach,  it  was  full
night. He was dizzy and terribly tired. Yet in delight he flew a  loop  to
landing, with a snap roll just before touchdown. When they hear of it,  he
thought, of the Breakthrough, they'll be wild  with  joy.  How  much  more
there is now to living! Instead of our drab slogging forth and back to the
fishing boats, there's a reason to life! We  can  lift  ourselves  out  of
ignorance,  we  can  find  ourselves  as  creatures  of   excellence   and
intelligence and skill. We can be free! We can learn to fly!
     The years ahead hummed and glowed with promise.
     The gulls were flocked into the Council Gathering when he landed, and
apparently had been so flocked for some time. They were, in fact, waiting.
     "Jonathan Livingston Seagull! Stand to  Center!"  The  Elder's  words
sounded in a voice of highest ceremony. Stand to Center meant  only  great
shame or great honor. Stand to Center for Honor was  the  way  the  gulls'
foremost leaders were marked. Of course, he thought, the  Breakfast  Flock
this morning; they saw the Breakthrough! But I want no honors. I  have  no
wish to be leader. I want only to share what I've  found,  to  show  those
horizons out ahead for us all. He stepped forward.
     "Jonathan Livingston Seagull," said the Elder, "Stand to  Center  for
Shame in the sight of your fellow gulls!"
     It felt like being hit  with  a  board.  His  knees  went  weak,  his
feathers sagged, there was  roaring  in  his  ears.  Centered  for  shame?
Impossible!  The  Breakthrough!  They  can't  understand!  They're  wrong,
they're wrong!
     "... for his reckless irresponsibility " the  solemn  voice  intoned,
"violating the dignity and tradition of the Gull Family..."
     To be centered for shame meant that he would  be  cast  out  of  gull
society, banished to a solitary life on the Far Cliffs.
     "... one day  Jonathan  Livingston  Seagull,  you  shall  learn  that
irresponsibility does not pay. Life is the  unknown  and  the  unknowable,
except that we are put into this world to eat, to stay alive as long as we
possibly can."
     A seagull never  speaks  back  to  the  Council  Flock,  but  it  was
Jonathan's voice raised. "Irresponsibility? My brothers!" he  cried.  "Who
is more responsible than a gull who finds and follows a meaning, a  higher
purpose for life? For a thousand years we have scrabbled after fish heads,
but now we have a reason to live - to learn, to discover, to be free! Give
me one chance, let me show you what I've found..."
     The Flock might as well have been stone.
     "The Brotherhood is broken," the gulls intoned together, and with one
accord they solemnly closed their ears and turned their backs upon him.
     Jonathan Seagull spent the rest of his days alone, but  he  flew  way
out beyond the Far Cliffs. His one sorrow was not solituile, it  was  that
other gulls refused to believe the glory of flight that awaited them; they
refused to open their eyes and see. He learned more each day.  He  learned
that a streamlined high-speed dive could bring him to find  the  rare  and
tasty fish that schooled ten feet below the surface of the  ocean:  he  no
longer needed fishing boats and stale bread for survival.  He  learned  to
sleep in the air, setting a course at  night  across  the  offshore  wind,
covering a hundred miles from sunset  to  sunrise.  With  the  same  inner
control, he flew through  heavy  sea-fogs  and  climbed  above  them  into
dazzling clear skies... in the very times when every other gull  stood  on
the ground, knowing nothing but mist and rain. He learned to ride the high
winds far inland, to dine there on delicate insects.
     What he had once hoped for the  Flock,  he  now  gained  for  himself
alone; he learned to fly, and was not sorry for  the  price  that  he  had
paid. Jonathan Scagull discovered that boredom and fear and anger are  the
reasons that a gull's life is so short,  and  with  these  gone  from  his
thought, he lived a long fine life indeed.
     They came in the evening, then, and found Ionathan  gliding  peaceful
and alone through his beloved sky. The two  gulls  that  appeared  at  his
wings were pure as starlight, and  the  glow  from  them  was  gentle  and
friendly in the high night air. But most lovely of all was the skill  with
which they flew, their wingtips moving a precise and  constant  inch  from
his own. Without a word, Jonathan put them to his test,  a  test  that  no
gull had ever passed. He twisted his wings, slowed to a  single  mile  per
hour above stall. The two radiant birds slowed with him, smoothly,  locked
in position. They knew about slow flying.
     He folded his wings, rolled and dropped in a dive to a hundred ninety
miles per  hour.  They  dropped  with  him,  streaking  down  in  flawless
formation.
     At last he turned  that  speed  straight  up  into  a  long  vertical
slow-roll. They rolled with him, smiling.
     He recovered to level flight and was  quiet  for  a  time  before  he
spoke. "Very well," he said, "who are you?"
     "We're from your Flock, Jonathan. We are your  brothers."  The  words
were strong and calm. "We've come to take you higher, to take you home."
     "Home I have none. Flock I have none. I am Outcast. And we fly now at
the peak of the Great Mountain Wind. Beyond a few hundred feet, I can lift
this old body no higher."
     "But you can Jonathan. For you have learned. One school is  finished,
and the time has come for another to begin."
     As it had shined across him all his life,  so  understanding  lighted
that moment for Jonathan Seagull. They were right. He  could  fly  higher,
and it was time to go home.
     He gave one last look across the sky, across that magnificent  silver
land where he had learned so much.
     "I'm ready " he said at last.
     And Jonathan Livingston Seagull rose with the two starbright gulls to
disappear into a perfect dark sky.



    Part Two



     So this is heaven, he thought, and he had to smile at himself. It was
hardly respectful to analyze heaven in the very moment that one  flies  up
to enter it.
     As he came from Earth now, above the clouds and  in  close  formation
with the two brilliant gulls, he saw that his  own  body  was  growing  as
bright as theirs. True, the same young Jonathan Seagull was there that had
always lived behind his golden eyes, but the outer form had changed.
     It felt like a seagull body, but alreadv it flew far better than  his
old one had ever flown. Why, with half the effort, he  thought,  I'll  get
twice the speed, twice the performance of my best days on Earth!
     His feathers glowed brilliant white now, and his  wings  were  smooth
and perfect as sheets of polished silver. He began, delightedly, to  learn
about them, to press power into these new wings.
     At two hundred fifty mlles per hour he felt that he was  nearing  his
level-flight maximum speed. At two hundred seventy-three he  thought  that
he was flying as fast as  he  could  fly,  and  he  was  ever  so  faintly
disappointed. There was a limit to how much the new  body  could  do,  and
though it was much faster than his old level-flight record, it was still a
limit that would take great effort to crack. In heaven, he thought,  there
should be no limits.
     The  clouds  broke  apart,  his  escorts  called,  "Happy   landings,
Jonathan," and vanished into thin air.
     He was flying over a sea, toward  a  jagged  shoreline.  A  very  few
seagulls were working the updrafts on the cliffs. Away off to  the  north,
at the horizon itself, flew a few others. New sights,  new  thoughts,  new
questions. Why so few gulls? Heaven should be flocked with gulls! And  why
am I so tired, all at once? Gulls in  heaven  are  never  supposed  to  be
tired, or to sleep.
     Where had he heard that? The memory of his life on Earth was  falling
away. Earth had been a place where he had learned much, of course, but the
details were blurred -  something  about  fighting  for  food,  and  being
Outcast.
     The dozen gulls by the shoreline came to  meet  him,  none  saying  a
word. He felt only that he was welcome and that this was home. It had been
a bigday for him, a day whose sunrise he no longer remembered.
     He turned to land on the beach, beating his wings to stop an inch  in
the air, then dropping lightly to the sand, The other  gulls  landed  too,
but not one of them so much as flapped a  feather.  They  swung  into  the
wind, bright wings outstretched, then somehow they changed  the  curve  of
their feathers until they had stopped  in  the  same  instant  their  feet
touched the ground. It was beautiful control, but now  Jonathan  was  just
too tired to try it. Standiug there on the beach,  still  without  a  word
spoken, he was asleep.
     In the days that followed, Jonathan saw that there  was  as  much  to
learn about flight in this place as there had been in the life behind him.
But with a difference. Here were gulls who thought as he thought, For each
of them, the most important thing in living was to  reach  out  and  touch
perfection in that which they most loved to do, and that was to fly.  They
were magnificent birds, all of them, and they spent hour after hour  every
day practicing flight, testing advanced aeronautics.
     For a long time Jonathan forgot about the  world  that  he  had  come
from, that place where the Flock lived with its eyes tightly shut  to  the
joy of flight, using its wings as means to the end of finding and fighting
for food. But now and then, just for a moment, he remembered.
     He remembered it one morning when he was  out  with  his  instructor,
while they rested on the beach after a session of folded-wing snap rolls.
     "Where is everybody, Sullivan?" he asked silently, quite at home  now
with the easy telepathy that  these  gulls  used  instead  of  screes  and
gracks. "Why aren't there more of us here? Why, where I  came  from  there
were.. "
     "... thousands and thousands of gulls. I know. " Sullivan  shook  his
head. "The only answer I can see, Jonathan, is that you are pretty well  a
one-in-a-million bird. Most of us came along ever so slowly. We went  from
one world into another that was almost exactly like it,  forgettiug  right
away where we had come from, not caring where we were headed,  living  for
the moment. Do you have any idea how many lives we must have gone  through
before we even gor the first idea that there is more to life than  eating,
or fighting, or power in the Flock? A thousand lives, Jon,  ten  thousand!
And then another hundred lives until we began to learn that there is  such
a thing as perfection, and another hundred again to get the idea that  our
purpose for living is to find that perfection and show it forth. The  same
rule holds for us now, of course: we choose our next world through what we
learn in this one. Learn nothing, and the next world is the same  as  this
one, all the same limitations and lead weights to overcome."
     He stretched his wings and turned to face the wind. "But  you,  Jon,"
he said, "learned so much at one time that you didn't have to go through a
thousand lives to reach this one."
     In a moment they  were  airborne  again,  practicing.  The  formation
point-roils were difficult, for through the inverted half Jonathan had  to
think upside down, reversing the curve  of  his  wing,  and  reversing  it
exactly in harmony with his instructor's.
     "Let's try it again." Sullivan said over  and  over:  "Let's  try  it
again." Then, finally, "Good." And they began practicing outside loops.


     One evening the gulls that were not night-flying  stood  together  on
the sand, thinking. Jonathan took all his courage in hand  and  walked  to
the Elder Gull, who, it was said, was soon to be moving beyond this world.
"Chiang..." he said a little nervously.
     The old seagull looked at him kindly. "Yes, my son?" Instead of being
enfeebled by age, the Elder had been empowered by it; he could outfly  any
gull in the Flock, and he had learned skills that  the  others  were  only
gradually coming to know.
     "Chiang, this world isn't heaven at all, is it?" The Elder smiled  in
the moonlight. "You are learning again, Jonathan Seagull," he said.
     "Well, what happens from here? Where are we going? Is there  no  such
place as heaven?"
     "No, Jonathan, there is no such place. Heaven is not a place, and  it
is not a time. Heaven is being perfect." He was silent for a moment.  "You
are a very fast flier, aren't you?"
     "I... I enjoy speed," Jonathan said, taken aback but proud  that  the
Elder had noticed.
     "You will begin to touch heaven, Jonathan, in  the  moment  that  you
touch perfect speed. And that isn't flying a thousand miles an hour, or  a
million, or flying at the speed of light. Because any number is  a  limit,
and perfection doesn't have  limits.  Perfect  speed,  my  son,  is  being
there."
     Without warning, Chiang vanished and appeared  at  the  water's  edge
fifty feet away, all in the flicker of an instant. Then he vanished  again
and stood, in the same millisecond, at Jonathan's shoulder. "It's kind  of
fun," he said.


     Jonathan was dazzled. He forgot to ask about heaven. "How do  you  do
that? What does it feel like? How far can you go?"
     "You can go to any place and to any time that you wish  to  go,"  the
Elder said. "I've gone everywhere and everywhen I can think of." He looked
across the sea. "It's strange. The gulls who scorn perfection for the sake
of travel go nowhere, slowly. Those who put aside travel for the  sake  of
perfection go anywhere, instantly.  Remember,  Jonathan,  heaven  isn't  a
place or a time, because place and time are so  very  meaningless.  Heaven
is..."
     "Can you teach me to fly like that?"  Jonathan  Seagull  trembled  to
conquer another unknown.
     "Of course if you wish to learn."
     "I wish. When can we start?".
     "We could start now if you'd like."
     "I want to learn to fly like that," Jonathan said and a strange light
glowed in his eyes. "Tell me what to do,"
     Chiang spoke slowly and watched the younger gull ever  so  carefully.
"To fly as fast as thought, to anywhere that is," he said, "you must begin
by knowing that you have already arrived ..."
     The trick, according to Chiang,  was  for  Jonathan  to  stop  seeing
himself as trapped inside  a  limited  body  that  had  a  forty-two  inch
wingspan and performance that could be plotted on a chart. The  trick  was
to know that his true nature lived, as perfect  as  an  unwritten  number,
everywhere at once across space and time.


     Jonathan kept at it, fiercely, day after  day,  from  before  sunrise
till past midnight. And for all his effort he moved not  a  feather  width
from his spot.
     "Forget about faith!" Chiang said it time and again. "You didn't need
faith to fly, you needed to understand flying.This is jast the  same.  Now
try again ..."
     Then one day Jonathan, standing  on  the  shore,  closing  his  eyes,
concentrating, all in a flash knew what Chiang had been telling him. "Why,
that's true! I am a perfect, unlimited gull!" He felt  a  great  shock  of
joy.
     "Good!" said Chiang and there was victory in his voice.
     Jonathan opened his eyes. He stood alone with the Elder on a  totally
different seashore - trees down to the  water's  edge,  twin  yellow  suns
turning overhead.
     "At last you've got the idea," Chiang said, "but your control needs a
little work... "
     Jonathan was stunned. "Where are we?"
     Utterly unimpressed with the strange surroundings, the Elder  brushed
the question aside. "We're on some planet, obviously, with a green sky and
a double star for a sun."
     Jonathan made a scree of delight, the first sound he had  made  since
he had left Earth. "IT WORKS!"
     "Well, of course, it works, Jon." said Chiang. "It always works, when
you know what you're doing. Now about your control..."
     By the time they returned, it was dark. The  other  gulls  looked  at
Jonathan with awe in their golden eyes, for they had  seen  him  disappear
from where he had been rooted for so long.
     He stood their congratulations for  less  than  a  minute.  "I'm  the
newcomer here! I'm just beginning! It is I who must learn from you!"
     "I wonder about that, Jon," said Sullivan standing  near.  "You  have
less fear of learning than any gull I've seen in ten thousand years.  "The
Flock fell silent, and Jonathan fidgeted in embarrassment.
     "We can start working with time if you wish," Chiang said, "till  you
can fly the past and the future. And then you will be ready to  begin  the
most difficult, the most powerful, the most fun of all. You will be  ready
to begin to fly up and know the meaning of kindness and of love."
     A month went by, or something that  felt  about  like  a  month,  and
Jonathan learned at a tremendous rate. He always had learned quickly  from
ordinary experience, and now, the special student of the Elder Himself, he
took in new ideas like a streamlined feathered computer.
     But then the day came that  Chiang  vanished.  He  had  been  talking
quietly with them all, exhorting them never to  stop  their  learning  and
their practicing and their striving to  understand  more  of  the  perfect
invisible principle of all life. Then, as  he  spoke,  his  feathers  went
brighter and brighter and at last turned so brilliant that no  gull  could
look upon him.
     "Jonathan," he said, and these were the last  words  that  he  spoke,
"keep working on love."
     When they could see again, Chiang was gone.
     As the days went past, Jonathan found himself thinking time and again
of the Earth from which he had come. If he had known there just  a  tenth,
just a hundredth, of what he knew here, how  much  more  life  would  have
meant! He stood on the sand and fell to wondering if there was a gull back
there who might be struggling to break out  of  his  limits,  to  see  the
meaning of flight beyond a way of  travel  to  get  a  breadcrumb  from  a
rowboat. Perhaps there might even have been one made Outcast for  speaking
his truth in the face of the Flock. And the more  Jonathan  practiced  his
kindness lessons, and the more he worked to know the nature of  love,  the
more he wanted to go back to Earth. For  in  spite  of  his  lonely  past,
Jonathan Seagull was born  to  be  an  instructor,  and  his  own  way  of
demonstrating love was to give something of the truth that he had seen  to
a gull who asked only a chance to see truth for himself.
     Sullivan, adept now at thought-speed flight and helping the others to
learn, was doubrful.
     "Jon, you were Outcast once. Why do you think that any of  the  gulls
in your old time would listen to you now? You know the proverb,  and  it's
true: The gull sees farthest who flies highest. Those gulls where you came
from are standing on the ground, squawking and fighting among  themselves.
They're a thousand miles from heaven - and you say you want to  show  them
heaven from where they stand! Jon, they can't see their own wingtips! Stay
here. Help the new gulls here, the ones who are high enough  to  see  what
you have to tell them." He was quiet for a moment, and then he said, "What
if Chiang had gone back to his old  worlds?  Where  would  you  have  been
today?"
     The last point was the telling one, and Sullivan was right  The  gull
sees farthest who flies highest.
     Jonathan stayed and worked with the new birds coming in, who were all
very bright and quick with their lessons. But the old feeling  came  back,
and he couldn't help but think that there might be one or two  gulls  back
on Earth who would be able to learn, too. How  much  more  would  he  have
known by now if Chiang had come to him on the day that he was Outcast!
     "Sully, I must go back " he said at last  "Your  students  are  doing
well. They can help you bring the newcomers along."
     Sullivan sighed, but he did  not  argue.  "I  think  I'll  miss  you,
Jonathan," was all he said.
     "Sully, for shame!" Jonathan said in reproach, "and don't be foolish!
What are we trying to practice every day? If  our  friendship  depends  on
things like space and time, then when we finally overcome space and  time,
we've destroyed our own brotherhood! But overcome space, and all  we  have
left is Here. Overcome time, and all we have  left  is  Now.  And  in  the
middle of Here and Now, don't you think that we might see each other  once
or twice?"
     Sullivan Seagull laughed in spite of himself. "You  crazy  bird,"  he
said kindly. "If anybody can show someone on  the  ground  how  to  see  a
thousand miles, it will be Jonathan Livingston Seagull." He looked at  the
sand. "Good-bye, Jon, my friend."
     "Good bye, Sully. We'll meet again." And with that, Jonathan held  in
thought an image of the great gull flocks on the shore  of  another  time,
and he knew with practiced ease that he was not bone  and  feather  but  a
perfect idea of freedom and flight, limited by nothing at all.


     Fletcher Lynd Seagull was still quite young, but already he knew that
no bird had ever been so harshly treated by any Flock,  or  with  so  much
injustice.
     "I don't care what they say," he thought  fiercely,  and  his  vision
blurred as he flew out toward the Far Cliffs. "There's  so  much  more  to
flying than just flapping around from place to place! A...  a...  mosquito
does that! One little barrel roll around the Elder Gull, just for fun, and
I'm Outcast! Are they blind? Can't they see? Can't they think of the glory
that it'll be when we really learn to fly?
     "I don't care what they think. I'll show them what flying is! I'll be
pure Outlaw, if that's the way  they  want  it.  And  I'll  make  them  so
sorry..."
     The voice came inside his own head, and though it was very gentle, it
startled him so much that he faltered and stumbled in the air.
     "Don't be harsh on them, Fletcher Seagull. In casting  you  out,  the
other gulls have only hurt themselves, and one day they  will  know  this,
and one day they will see what you see. Forgive them,  and  help  them  to
understand."
     An inch from his right wingtip flew the most brilliant white gull  in
all the world, gliding effortlessly along, not moving a feather,  at  what
was very nearly Fletcher's top speed.
     There was a moment of chaos in the young bird. "What's going on? Am I
mad? Am I dead? What is this?"
     Low and calm, the voice went on  within  his  thought,  demanding  an
answer. "Fletcher Lynd Seagull, do you want to fly?"
     "YES, I WANT TO FLY!".
     "Fletcher Lynd Seagull, do you want to fly  so  much  that  you  will
forgive the Flock, and learn, and go back to them one day and work to help
them know?"
     There was no lying to this magniflcent skillful being, no matter  how
proud or how hurt a bird was Fletcher Seagull.
     "I do " he said softly.
     "Then, Fletch," that bright creature said to him, and the  voice  was
very kind, "let's begin with Level Flight...."



    Part Three



     Jonathan circled slowly over the Far  Cliffs,  watching.  This  rough
young Fletcher Gull was very  nearly  a  perfect  flight-student.  He  was
strong and light and quick in the air, but far and away more important, he
had a blazing drive to learn to fly.
     Here he came this minute, a blurred gray shape roaring out of a dive,
flashing one hundred fifty miles per hour past his instructor.  He  pulled
abruptly into another try at a sixteen point vertical slow  roll,  calling
the points out loud.
     "...eight... nine... ten... see-Jonathan-l'm-running-out-ofairspeed..
eleven...      I-want-good-sharp-stops-like       yours...       twelve...
but-blast-it-Ijust-can't-make... -  thirteen...  theselast-three-points...
without... fourtee ...aaakk!"
     Fletcher's whipstall at the top was all the worse for  his  rage  and
fury at failing. He fell  backward,  tumbled,  slammed  savagely  into  an
inverted spin, and recovered at last, panting, a hundred  feet  below  his
instructor's level.
     "You're wasting your time with me, Jonathan! I'm too  dumb!  I'm  too
stupid! I try and try, but I'll never get it!"
     Jonathan Seagull looked down at him and nodded. "You'll never get  it
for sure as long as you make that pullup so hard. Fletcher, you lost forty
miles an hour in the entry! You  have  to  be  smooth!  Firm  but  smooth,
remember?"
     He dropped down to the  level  of  the  younger  gull."Let's  try  it
together now, in formation. And pay  attention  to  that  pullup.  It's  a
smooth, easy entry."


     By the end of three months Jonathan had six other students,  Outcasts
all, yet curious about this strange new idea of  flight  for  the  joy  of
flying.
     Still, it was easier for them to practice high  performance  than  it
was to understand the reason behindit.
     "Each of us is in truth an idea of the Great Gull, an unlimited  idea
of freedom," Jonathan would  say  in  the  evenings  on  the  beach,  "and
precision flying is a step toward expressing  our  real  nature.Everything
that limits us we have to  put  aside.  That's  why  all  this  high-speed
practice, and low speed, and aerobatics...."
     ...and his students would be asleep, exhausted from the day's flying.
They liked the practice, because it was fast and exciting  and  it  fed  a
hunger for learning that grew with every lesson. But not one of them,  not
even Fletcher Lynd Gull, had come to believe  that  the  flight  of  ideas
could possibly be as real as the flight of wind and feather.
     "Your whole body, from wingtip to wingtip," Jonathan would say, other
times, "is nothing more than your thought itself, in a form you  can  see.
Break the chains of your thought, and you break the chains of  your  body,
too..." But no matter how he said it, it sounded  like  pleasant  fiction,
and they needed more to sleep.
     It was only a month later that Jonathan said the  time  had  come  to
return to the Flock.
     "We're not ready!" said Henry Calvin Gull. "We're not welcome!  We're
Outcast! We can't force ourselves to go where we're not welcome, can we?"
     "We're free to go where we wish and to  be  what  we  are,"  Jonathan
answered, and he lifted from the sand and turned  east,  toward  the  home
grounds of the Flock.
     There was brief anguish among his students, for it is the Law of  the
Flock that an Outcast never returns, and the Law had not been broken  once
in ten thousand years. The Law said stay; Jonathan said go; and by now  he
was a mile across the water. If they waited much longer, he would reach  a
hostile Flock alone.
     "Well, we don't have to obey the law if  we're  not  a  part  of  the
Flock, do  we?"  Fletcher  said,  rather  self-consciously.  "Besides,  if
there's a fight we'll be a lot more help there than here."'
     And so they flew in from the west that morning, eight of  them  in  a
double-diamond formation, wingtips almost overlapping.  They  came  across
the Flock's Council  Beach  at  a  hundred  thirty-five  miles  per  hour,
Jonathan in the lead. Fletcher smoothly at his right  wing,  Henry  Calvin
struggling gamely at his left. Then the whole formation rolled  slowly  to
the right, as one bird... level... to... inverted... to... level, the wind
whipping over them all.
     The squawks and grockles of everyday life in the Flock were  cut  off
as though the formation were a giant knife, and eight  thousand  gull-eyes
watched, without a single blink. One by  one,  each  of  the  eight  birds
pulled sharply upward into a full loop and flew all the way  around  to  a
dead-slow stand-up landing on the sand. Then as though this sort of  thing
happened every day, Jonathan Seagull began his critique of the flight.
     "To begin with," he said with a wry smile, "you were all a  bit  late
on the join-up..."
     It went like lightning through the Flock. Those  birds  are  Outcast!
And  they  have  returned!  And  that...  that  can't  happen!  Fletcher's
predictions of battle melted in the Flock's confusion.
     "Well sure, O.K. they're Outcast," said some of  the  younger  gulls,
"but hey, man, where did they learn to fly like that?"
     It took almost an hour for the Word of the Elder to pass through  the
Flock: Ignore them. The gull who speaks to an Outcast is himself  Outcast.
The gull  who  looks  upon  an  Outcast  breaks  the  Law  of  the  Flock,
Gray-feathered backs were turned upon Jonathan from  that  moment  onward,
but he didn't appear to notice. He held  his  practice  sessions  directly
over the Council Beach and for the first time began pressing his  students
to the limit of their ability.
     "Martin Gull!" he shouted across the sky. "You say you know low-speed
flying. You know nothing till you prove it! FLY!"
     So quiet little Martin William Seagull, startled to be  caught  under
his instructor's fire, surprised  himself  and  became  a  wizard  of  low
speeds. In the lightest breeze he could curve his feathers to lift himself
without a single flap of wing from sand to cloud and down again.
     Likewise  Charles-Roland  Gull  flew  the  Great  Mountain  Wind   to
twenty-four thousand feet, came down blue from the cold thin  air,  amazed
and happy, determined to go still higher tomorrow.
     Fletcher Seagull, who loved aerobatics like no  one  else,  conquered
his sixteen point vertical slow roll and the next day topped it off with a
triple cartwheel, his feathers flashing white sunlight  to  a  beach  from
which more than one furtive eye watched.
     Every hour Jonathan was there at the side of each  of  his  students,
demonstrating, suggesting, pressuring, guiding. He flew with them  through
night and cloud and storm, for the sport of it, while  the  Flock  huddled
miserably on the ground.
     When the flying was done, the students relaxed in the  sand,  and  in
time they listened more closely to Jonathan. He had some crazy ideas  that
they couldn't understand, but then he had some good ones that they could.
     Gradually, in the night, another circle formed around the  circle  of
students a circle of curious gulls listening in the darkness for hours  on
end, not wishing to see or be seen of  one  another,  fading  away  before
daybreak.
     It was a month after the Return that the  first  gull  of  the  Flock
crossed the line and asked to learn how to fly. In  his  asking,  Terrence
Lowell Gull became a condemned bird, labeled Outcast; and  the  eighth  of
Jonathan's students.
     The next night from the Flock came Kirk Maynard Gull, wobbling across
the sand, dragging his leftwing,to collapse at Jonathan's feet. "Help me,"
he said very quietly, speaking in the way that the dying speak. "I want to
fly more than anything else in the world..."
     "Come along then." said  Jonathan.  "Climb  with  me  away  from  the
ground, and we'll begin."
     "You don't understand My wing. I can't move my wing."
     "Maynard Gull, you have the freedom to be yourself, your  true  self,
here and now, and nothing can stand in your way.It is the Law of the Great
Gull, the Law that Is."
     "Are you saying I can fly?"
     "I say you are free."
     As simply and as quickly as that, Kirk Maynard Gull spread his wings,
effortlessly, and lifted into the dark night air.  The  Flock  was  roused
from sleep by his cry, as loud as he could scream it,  from  five  hundred
feet up: "I can fly! Listen! I CAN FLY!"
     By sunrise there were nearly a thousand birds  standing  outside  the
circle of students, looking curiously at Maynard. They didn't care whether
they were seen or not, and they listened, trying  to  understand  Jonathan
Seagull.
     He spoke of very simple things - that it is right for a guil to  fly,
that freedom is the very nature of his being, that whatever stands against
that freedom must be set aside, be it ritual or superstition or limitation
in any form.
     "Set aside," came a voice from the multitude, "even if it be the  Law
of the Flock?"
     "The only true law is that which leads to  freedom,"  Jonathan  said.
"There is no other."
     "How do you expect us to fly as you fly?" came  another  voice.  "You
are special and gifted and divine, above other birds."
     "Look at Fletcher! Lowell! Charles-Roland! Judy Lee!  Are  they  also
special and gifted and divine? No more than you are, no more  than  I  am.
The only difference, the very  only  one,  is  that  they  have  begun  to
understand what they really are and have begun to practice it."
     His students, save Fletcher, shifted uneasily. They  hadn't  realized
that this was what they were doing.
     The crowd grew larger every day, coming to question, to  idolize,  to
scorn.


     "They are saying in the Flock that if you are  not  the  Son  of  the
Great Gull Himself," Fletcher told Jonathan  one  morning  after  Advanced
Speed Practice, "then you are a thousand years ahead of your time."
     Jonathan sighed. The price of being misunderstood, he  thought.  They
call you devil or they call you god. "What do you think,  Fletch?  Are  we
ahead of our time?"
     A long silence. "Well, this kind of flying has always been here to be
learned by anybody who wanted to discover it; that's  got  nothing  to  do
with time. We're ahead of the fashion, maybe, Ahead of the way  that  most
gulls fly."
     "That's something," Jonathan said rolling to  glide  inverted  for  a
while. "That's not half as bad as being ahead of our time."


     It happened  just  a  week  later.  Fletcher  was  demonstrating  the
elements of high-speed flying to a class of  new  students.  He  had  just
pulled out of his dive from seven thousand feet, a long gray streak firing
a few inches above the beach, when a young bird on its first flight glided
directly into his path, calling for its mother. With a tenth of  a  second
to avoid the youngster, Fletcher Lynd Seagull snapped hard to the left, at
something over two hundred miles per hour, into a cliff of solid granite.
     It was, for him, as though the rock  were  a  giant  hard  door  into
another world. A burst of fear and shock and black as he hit, and then  he
was adrift in a strange strange sky, forgetting, remembering,  forgetting;
afraid and sad and sorry, terribly sorry.
     The voice came to him as it had in the first  day  that  he  had  met
Jonathan Livingston Seagull,
     "The trick Fletcher is that we are trying to overcome our limitations
in order, patiently, We don't tackle flying through rock  until  a  little
later in the program."
     "Jonathan!".
     "Also known as the Son of the Great Gull " his instructor said dryly,
     "What are you doing here? The cliff! Haven't I didn't I.., die?"
     "Oh, Fletch, come on. Think. If you  are  talking  to  me  now,  then
obviously you didn't die, did you? What you did manage to do was to change
your level of consciousness rather abruptly. It's your choice now. You can
stay here and learn on this level - which is quite a bit higher  than  the
one you left, by the way - or you can go back and keep  working  with  the
Flock. The Elders were hoping for  some  kind  of  disaster,  but  they're
startled that you obliged them so well."
     "I want to go back to the Flock, of course. I've  barely  begun  with
the new group!"
     "Very well, Fletcher. Remember what we were saying about  one's  body
being nothing more than thought itself....?"


     Fletcher shook his head and stretched his wings and opened  his  eyes
at the base of the cliff, in the center  of  the  whole  Flock  assembled.
There was a great clamor of squawks and screes from the crowd  when  first
he moved.
     "He lives! He that was dead lives!"
     "Touched him with a wingtip! Brought him to  life!  The  Son  of  the
Great Gull!"
     "No! He denies it! He's a devil! DEVIL! Come to break the Flock!"
     There were four thousand gulls in the crowd, frightened at  what  had
happened, and the cry DEVIL! went through them like the wind of  an  ocean
storm. Eyes glazed, beaks sharp, they closed in to destroy.
     "Would you feel better if we left, Fletcher?" asked Jonathan.
     "I certainly wouldn't object too much if we did..."
     Instantly they stood together a  half-mile  away,  and  the  flashing
beaks of the mob closed on empty air.
     "Why is it," Jonathan puzzled, "that the hardest thing in  the  world
is to convince a bird that he is free,  and  that  he  can  prove  it  for
himself if he'd just spend a little time practicing? Why should that be so
hard?"
     Fletcher still blinked from the change of scene. "What did  you  just
do? How did we get here?"
     "You did say you wanted to be out of the mob, didn't you?"
     "Yes! But how did you..."
     "Like everything else, Fletcher. Practice." By morning the Flock  had
forgotten its insanity, but Fletcher had not. "Jonathan, remember what you
said a long time ago, about loving the Flock enough to return  to  it  and
help it learn?"
     "Sure."
     "I don't understand how you manage to love a mob of  birds  that  has
just tried to kill you."
     "Oh, Fletch, you don't love that! You don't love hatred and evil,  of
course. You have to practice and see the real gull, the good in every  one
of them, and to help them see it in themselves.  That's  what  I  mean  by
love. It's fun, when you get the knack of it.
     "I remember a fierce young bird for instance, Fletcher Lynd  Seagull,
his name. Just been made Outcast, ready to fight the Flock to  the  death,
getting a start on building his own bitter hell out on the Far Cliffs. And
here he is today building his own heaven instead, and  leading  the  whole
Flock in that direction."
     Fletcher turned to his instructor, and there was a moment  of  fright
in his eye. "Me  leading?  What  do  you  mean,  me  leading?  You're  the
instructor here. You couldn't leave!"
     "Couldn't I? Don't you think that there might be other flocks,  other
Fletchers, that need an instructor more than this one, that's on  its  way
toward the light?"
     "Me? Jon, I'm just a plain seagull and you're... "
     " ...the only Son of the Great Gull, I suppose?" Jonathan sighed  and
looked out to sea. "You don't need me any longer. You need to keep finding
yourself, a little more each day, that real, unlimited  Fletcher  Seagull.
He's your in structor. You need to understand him and to practice him."
     A moment later Jonathan's body wavered in the  air,  shimmering,  and
began to go transparent. "Don't let them spread silly rumors about me,  or
make me a god. O.K., Fletch? I'm a seagull. I like to fly, maybe..."
     "JONATHAN!"
     "Poor Fletch. Don't believe what your eyes are telling you. All  they
show is limitation. Look  with  your  understanding,  find  out  what  you
already know, and you'll see the way to fly."
     The shimmering stopped. Jonathan Seagull had vanished into empty air.
     After a time, Fletcher Gull dragged himself into the sky and faced  a
brand-new group of students, eager for their first lesson.
     "To begin with " he said heavily, "you've got to  understand  that  a
seagull is an unlimited idea of freedom, an image of the Great  Gull,  and
your whole body, from wingtip  to  wingtip,  is  nothing  more  than  your
thought itself."
     The young gulls looked at him quizzically. Hey,  man,  they  thought,
this doesn't sound like a rule for a loop.
     Fletcher sighed and started over. "Hm. Ah... very well," he said, and
eyed them critically. "Let's begin with Level Flight." And saying that, he
understood all at once that his friend had quite  honestly  been  no  more
divine than Fletcher himself.
     No limits, Jonathan? he thought. Well, then, the time's  not  distant
when I'm going to appear out of thin air on your beach,  and  show  you  a
thing or two about flying!
     And though he  tried  to  look  properly  severe  for  his  students,
Fletcher Seagull suddenly saw them all as they really  were,  just  for  a
moment, and he more than liked, he loved what he saw. No limits, Jonathan?
he thought, and he smiled. His race to learn had begun.


    1973

I
Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book,
called /True Stories from Nature/, about the primeval forest. It was a
picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is
a copy of the drawing.
Boa
In the book it said: /"Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole,
without chewing it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep
through the six months that they need for digestion."/
I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after
some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing.
My Drawing Number One. It looked something like this:
Hat
I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the
drawing frightened them.
But they answered: /"Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?"/
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa
constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able
to understand it, I made another drawing: I drew the inside of a boa
constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always
need to have things explained. My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
Elephant inside the boa
The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my
drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside,
and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic, and
grammar. That is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been
a magnificent career as a painter. I had been disheartened by the
failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups
never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for children
to be always and forever explaining things to them.
So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I
have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that
geography has been very useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish
China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge is
valuable.
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a
great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I
have lived a great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately,
close at hand. And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them.
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I
tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have
always kept. I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true
understanding. But, whoever it was, he, or she, would always say:
/"That is a hat."/
Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or
primeval forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I
would talk to him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties.
And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man.
II
So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to,
until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years
ago. Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a
mechanic nor any passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult
repairs all alone. It was a question of life or death for me: I had
scarcely enough drinking water to last a week.
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles
from any human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor
on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement,
at sunrise, when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
/"If you please--draw me a sheep!"/
/"What!"/
/"Draw me a sheep!"/
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I
looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small
person, who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you
may see the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him. But my
drawing is certainly very much less charming than its model.
The Little prince
That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my
painter's career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw
anything, except boas from the outside and boas from the inside.
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out
of my head in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a
thousand miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed
neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands, nor to be fainting
from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any
suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles
from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I said to him:
/"But--what are you doing here?"/
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a
matter of great consequence:
/"If you please--draw me a sheep . . ."/
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it
might seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in
danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my
fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated
on geography, history, arithmetic and grammar, and I told the little
chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not know how to draw. He
answered me:
/"That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep . . ."/
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures
I had drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the
outside. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with:
/"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa
constrictor is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very
cumbersome. Where I live, everything is very small. What I need is a
sheep. Draw me a sheep."/
So then I made a drawing.
Sick sheep
He looked at it carefully, then he said:
/"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another."/
So I made another drawing.
A ram
My friend smiled gently and indulgently.
/"You see yourself,"/ he said, /"that this is not a sheep. This is a
ram. It has horns."/
So then I did my drawing over once more.
But it was rejected too, just like the others.
/"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time."/
Old sheep
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to
start taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing.
Sheep in the box
And I threw out an explanation with it.
/"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside."/
I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge:
/"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will
have to have a great deal of grass?"/
/"Why?"/
/"Because where I live everything is very small . . ."/
/"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very
small sheep that I have given you."/
He bent his head over the drawing.
/"Not so small that--Look! He has gone to sleep . . ."/
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.
III
It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince,
who asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked
him. It was from words dropped by chance that, little by little,
everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my
airplane; that would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
The Little prince
/"What is that object?"/
/"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."/
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly.
He cried out, then:
/"What! You dropped down from the sky?"/
/"Yes,"/ I answered, modestly.
/"Oh! That is funny!"/
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which
irritated me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
/"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"/
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of
his presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
/"Do you come from another planet?"/
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes
from my plane:
/"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away . . ."/
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my
sheep out of his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his
treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence
about the /"other planets."/ I made a great effort, therefore, to find
out more on this subject.
/"My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of
which you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"/
After a reflective silence he answered:
/"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at
night he can use it as his house."/
/"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that
you can tie him during the day, and a post to tie him to."/
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
The Little prince and stars
/"Tie him! What a queer idea!"/
/"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and
get lost."/
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
/"But where do you think he would go?"/
/"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."/
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
/"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!"/
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
/"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far . . ."/
IV
I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the
planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house!
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in
addition to the great planets--such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus--to which we have given names, there are also hundreds of others,
some of which are so small that one has a hard time seeing them through
the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one of these he does not
give it a name, but only a number. He might call it, for example,
/"Asteroid 325"/.
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little
prince came is the asteroid known as B-612.
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by
a Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
Star-gazer
On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the
International Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he
was in Turkish costume, and so nobody would believe what he said.
Grown-ups are like that . . .
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish
dictator made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should
change to European costume. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his
demonstration all over again, dressed with impressive style and
elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report.
Turkish astronomer
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of
its number for you, it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways.
When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you
any questions about essential matters. They never say to you, /"What
does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect
butterflies?"/ Instead, they demand: /"How old is he? How many brothers
has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make?"/
Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him.
If you were to say to the grown-ups: /"I saw a beautiful house made of
rosy brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof,"/ they
would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have
to say to them: /"I saw a house that cost $20,000."/ Then they would
exclaim: /"Oh, what a pretty house that is!"/
Just so, you might say to them: /"The proof that the little prince
existed is that he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was
looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he
exists."/ And what good would it do to tell them that? They would shrug
their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you said to them:
/"The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612,"/ then they would be
convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions.
European astronomer
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should
always show great forbearance toward grown-up people.
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of
indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of
the fairy-tales. I should have like to say: /"Once upon a time there was
a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than
himself, and who had need of a sheep . . ."/
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air
of truth to my story.
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered
too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already
passed since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to
describe him here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To
forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget
him, I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in
anything but figures . . .
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and
some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have
never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the
outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I
shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as possible.
But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right,
and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors, too,
in the little prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in
another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his
costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good, now bad, and I hope
generally fair-to-middling.
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that
is something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained
anything to me. He thought, perhaps, that I was like himself. But I,
alas, do not know how to see sheep through the walls of boxes. Perhaps I
am a little like the grown-ups. I have had to grow old.
V
As each day passed I would learn, in our talk, something about the
little prince's planet, his departure from it, his journey. The
information would come very slowly, as it might chance to fall from his
thoughts. It was in this way that I heard, on the third day, about the
catastrophe of the baobabs.
This time, once more, I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little
prince asked me abruptly--as if seized by a grave doubt--/"It is true,
isn't it, that sheep eat little bushes?"/
/"Yes, that is true."/
/"Ah! I am glad!"/
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat
little bushes. But the little prince added:
/"Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?"/
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes,
but, on the contrary, trees as big as castles; and that even if he took
a whole herd of elephants away with him, the herd would not eat up one
single baobab.
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
/"We would have to put them one on top of the other,"/ he said.
Elephans on the planet
But he made a wise comment:
/"Before they grow so big, the baobabs start out by being little."/
/"That is strictly correct," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to
eat the little baobabs?"/
He answered me at once, /"Oh, come, come!"/, as if he were speaking of
something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great
mental effort to solve this problem, without any assistance.
Indeed, as I learned, there were on the planet where the little prince
lived--as on all planets--good plants and bad plants. In consequence,
there were good seeds from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants.
But seeds are invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's
darkness, until some one among them is seized with the desire to awaken.
Then this little seed will stretch itself and begin--timidly at
first--to push a charming little sprig inoffensively upward toward the
sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig of a rose-bush, one
would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a bad plant,
one must destroy it as soon as possible, the very first instant that one
recognizes it.
Chare of the planet
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of
the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of
that planet was infested with them. A baobab is something you will
never, never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It
spreads over the entire planet. It bores clear through it with its
roots. And if the planet is too small, and the baobabs are too many,
they split it in pieces . . .
/"It is a question of discipline,"/ the little prince said to me later
on. /"When you've finished your own toilet in the morning, then it is
time to attend to the toilet of your planet, just so, with the greatest
care. You must see to it that you pull up regularly all the baobabs, at
the very first moment when they can be distinguished from the rosebushes
which they resemble so closely in their earliest youth. It is very
tedious work,"/ the little prince added, /"but very easy."/
And one day he said to me: /"You ought to make a beautiful drawing, so
that the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That
would be very useful to them if they were to travel some day.
Sometimes,"/ he added, /"there is no harm in putting off a piece of work
until another day. But when it is a matter of baobabs, that always means
a catastrophe. I knew a planet that was inhabited by a lazy man. He
neglected three little bushes . . ."/
So, as the little prince described it to me, I have made a drawing of
that planet. I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the
danger of the baobabs is so little understood, and such considerable
risks would be run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that for
once I am breaking through my reserve. /"Children," I say plainly,
"watch out for the baobabs!"/
My friends, like myself, have been skirting this danger for a long time,
without ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so
hard over this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is
worth all the trouble it has cost me.
Baobabs
Perhaps you will ask me, /"Why are there no other drawing in this book
as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?"/
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been
successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond
myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.
VI
Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your
sad little life . . . For a long time you had found your only
entertainment in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned
that new detail on the morning of the fourth day, when you said to me:
/"I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now."/
/"But we must wait,"/ I said.
/"Wait? For what?"/
/"For the sunset. We must wait until it is time."/
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to
yourself. You said to me:
/"I am always thinking that I am at home!"/
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the
sun is setting over France.
If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the
sunset, right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that.
But on your tiny planet, my little prince, all you need do is move your
chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling
whenever you like . . .
/"One day,"/ you said to me, /"I saw the sunset forty-four times!"/
And a little later you added:
/"You know--one loves the sunset, when one is so sad . . ."/
/"Were you so sad, then?"/ I asked, /"on the day of the forty-four
sunsets?"/
But the little prince made no reply.
Sunsets
VII
On the fifth day--again, as always, it was thanks to the sheep--the
secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly, without
anything to lead up to it, and as if the question had been born of long
and silent meditation on his problem, he demanded:
/"A sheep--if it eats little bushes, does it eat flowers, too?"/
/"A sheep,"/ I answered, /"eats anything it finds in its reach."/
/"Even flowers that have thorns?"/
/"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."/
/"Then the thorns--what use are they?"/
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt
that had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried, for it was
becoming clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely
serious. And I had so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for
the worst.
/"The thorns--what use are they?"/
The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. As
for me, I was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing
that came into my head:
/"The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!"/
/"Oh!"/
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed
back at me, with a kind of resentfulness:
/"I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are nave. They
reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are
terrible weapons . . ."/
I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: /"If this bolt
still won't turn, I am going to knock it out with the hammer."/ Again
the little prince disturbed my thoughts:
/"And you actually believe that the flowers--"/
/"Oh, no!"/ I cried. /"No, no, no! I don't believe anything. I answered
you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see--I am
very busy with matters of consequence!"/
He stared at me, thunderstruck.
/"Matters of consequence!"/
He looked at me there, with my hammer in my hand, my fingers black with
engine-grease, bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely
ugly . . .
/"You talk just like the grown-ups!"/
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on, relentlessly:
/"You mix everything up together . . . You confuse everything . . ."/
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
/"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has
never smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never
loved any one. He has never done anything in his life but add up
figures. And all day he says over and over, just like you: 'I am busy
with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride.
But he is not a man--he is a mushroom!"/
/"A what?"/
/"A mushroom!"/
The little prince was now white with rage.
/"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For
millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is
it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go
to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is
the warfare between the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not
of more consequence than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I
know--I, myself--one flower which is unique in the world, which grows
nowhere but on my planet, but which one little sheep can destroy in a
single bite some morning, without even noticing what he is doing--Oh!
You think that is not important!"/
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
/"If some one loves a flower, of which just one single blossom grows in
all the millions and millions of stars, it is enough to make him happy
just to look at the stars. He can say to himself, 'Somewhere, my flower
is there . . .' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his
stars will be darkened . . . And you think that is not important!"/
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing.
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what
moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death? On one star, one
planet, my planet, the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted.
I took him in my arms, and rocked him. I said to him:
/"The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle
for your sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I
will--"/
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did
not know how I could reach him, where I could overtake him and go on
hand in hand with him once more.
It is such a secret place, the land of tears.
The flower
VIII
I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet
the flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of
petals; they took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One
morning they would appear in the grass, and by night they would have
faded peacefully away. But one day, from a seed blown from no one knew
where, a new flower had come up; and the little prince had watched very
closely over this small sprout which was not like any other small
sprouts on his planet. It might, you see, have been a new kind of baobab.
The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to get ready to produce a
flower. The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a
huge bud, felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must
emerge from it. But the flower was not satisfied to complete the
preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She
chose her colors with the greatest care. She dressed herself slowly. She
adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the
world all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full
radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a
coquettish creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for days and days.
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed herself.
The Little prince and the flower
And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and
said:
/"Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are
still all disarranged . . ."/
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
/"Oh! How beautiful you are!"/
/"Am I not?"/ the flower responded, sweetly. /"And I was born at the
same moment as the sun . . ."/
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too
modest--but how moving--and exciting--she was!
/"I think it is time for breakfast,"/ she added an instant later. /"If
you would have the kindness to think of my needs--"/
The Little princ eis watering the flower
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a
sprinkling-can of fresh water. So, he tended the flower.
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity--which
was, if the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. One day,
for instance, when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the
little prince:
/"Let the tigers come with their claws!"/
/"There are no tigers on my planet,"/ the little prince objected. /"And,
anyway, tigers do not eat weeds."/
/"I am not a weed,"/ the flower replied, sweetly.
/"Please excuse me . . ."/
/"I am not at all afraid of tigers,"/ she went on, /"but I have a horror
of drafts. I suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?"/
/"A horror of drafts--that is bad luck, for a plant,"/ remarked the
little prince, and added to himself, /"This flower is a very complex
creature . . ."/
The Little prince is saving the flower
/"At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold
where you live. In the place I came from--"/
But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a
seed. She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarassed
over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a nave untruth,
she coughed two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the
wrong.
/"The screen?"/
/"I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me . . ."/
Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from
remorse just the same.
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable
from his love, had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words
which were without importance, and it made him very unhappy.
/"I ought not to have listened to her,"/ he confided to me one day.
/"One never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at
them and breathe their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did
not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws,
which disturbed me so much, should only have filled my heart with
tenderness and pity."/
Beast of prey and the flower
And he continued his confidences:
/"The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to
have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her
radiance over me. I ought never to have run away from her . . . I ought
to have guessed all the affection that lay behind her poor little
strategems. Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how
to love her "/
Winter on the planet
IX
I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a
flock of wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet
in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He
possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for
heating his breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was
extinct. But, as he said, /"One never knows!"/ So he cleaned out the
extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes burn
slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like
fires in a chimney.
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes.
That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us.
The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the
last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want
to return. But on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very
precious to him. And when he watered the flower for the last time, and
prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe, he realized
that he was very close to tears.
/"Goodbye,"/ he said to the flower.
But she made no answer.
/"Goodbye,"/ he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold.
/"I have been silly,"/ she said to him, at last. /"I ask your
forgiveness. Try to be happy . . ."/
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all
bewildered, the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not
understand this quiet sweetness.
/"Of course I love you,"/ the flower said to him. /"It is my fault that
you have not known it all the while. That is of no importance. But
you--you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy . . . Let the
glass globe be. I don't want it any more."/
The Little price is cleaning volcano
/"But the wind--"/
/"My cold is not so bad as all that . . . The cool night air will do me
good. I am a flower."/
/"But the animals--"/
/"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I
wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are
very beautiful. And if not the butterflies--and the caterpillars--who
will call upon me? You will be far away . . . As for the large
animals--I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws."/
And, navely, she showed her four thorns. Then she added:
/"Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!"/
For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower.
X
He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327,
328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to
add to his knowledge.
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and
ermine, he was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both
simple and majestic.
The king
/"Ah! Here is a subject,"/ exclaimed the king, when he saw the little
prince coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
/"How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?"/
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men
are subjects.
/"Approach, so that I may see you better,"/ said the king, who felt
consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody.
The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the
entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent
ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since he was tired,
he yawned.
/"It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king,"/ the
monarch said to him. /"I forbid you to do so."/
/"I can't help it. I can't stop myself,"/ replied the little prince,
thoroughly embarrassed. /"I have come on a long journey, and I have had
no sleep . . ."/
/"Ah, then,"/ the king said. /"I order you to yawn. It is years since I
have seen anyone yawning. Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come,
now! Yawn again! It is an order."/
/"That frightens me . . . I cannot, any more . . ."/ murmured the little
prince, now completely abashed.
/"Hum! Hum!"/ replied the king. /"Then I--I order you sometimes to yawn
and sometimes to--"/
He sputtered a little, and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority
should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute
monarch. But, because he was a very good man, he made his orders
reasonable.
/"If I ordered a general,"/ he would say, by way of example, /"if I
ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general
did not obey me, that would not be the fault of the general. It would be
my fault."/
/"May I sit down?"/ came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
/"I order you to do so,"/ the king answered him, and majestically
gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering . . . The planet was tiny. Over what
could this king really rule?
/"Sire,"/ he said to him, /"I beg that you will excuse my asking you a
question--"/
/"I order you to ask me a question,"/ the king hastened to assure him.
/"Sire--over what do you rule?"/
/"Over everything,"/ said the king, with magnificent simplicity.
/"Over everything?"/
The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets,
and all the stars.
/"Over all that?"/ asked the little prince.
/"Over all that,"/ the king answered.
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
/"And the stars obey you?"/
/"Certainly they do,"/ the king said. /"They obey instantly. I do not
permit insubordination."/
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had
been master of such complete authority, he would have been able to watch
the sunset, not forty-four times in one day, but seventy-two, or even a
hundred, or even two hundred times, without ever having to move his
chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet
which he had forsaken, he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favor:
/"I should like to see a sunset . . . Do me that kindness . . . Order
the sun to set . . ."/
/"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a
butterfly, or to write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea
bird, and if the general did not carry out the order that he had
received, which one of us would be in the wrong?"/ the king demanded.
/"The general, or myself?"/
/"You,"/ said the little prince firmly.
/"Exactly. One must require from each one the duty which each one can
perform,"/ the king went on. /"Accepted authority rests first of all on
reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the
sea, they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require
obedience because my orders are reasonable."/
/"Then my sunset?"/ the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot
a question once he had asked it.
/"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my
science of government, I shall wait until conditions are favorable."/
/"When will that be?"/ inquired the little prince.
/"Hum! Hum!"/ replied the king; and before saying anything else he
consulted a bulky almanac. /"Hum! Hum! That will be about--about--that
will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how
well I am obeyed!"/
The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then,
too, he was already beginning to be a little bored.
/"I have nothing more to do here,"/ he said to the king. /"So I shall
set out on my way again."/
/"Do not go,"/ said the king, who was very proud of having a subject.
/"Do not go. I will make you a Minister!"/
/"Minister of what?"/
/"Minster of--of Justice!"/
/"But there is nobody here to judge!"/
/"We do not know that,"/ the king said to him. /"I have not yet made a
complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a
carriage. And it tires me to walk."/
/"Oh, but I have looked already!"/ said the little prince, turning
around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that
side, as on this, there was nobody at all . . .
/"Then you shall judge yourself,"/ the king answered. /"that is the most
difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than
to judge others. If you succeed in judging yourself rightly, then you
are indeed a man of true wisdom."/
/"Yes,"/ said the little prince, /"but I can judge myself anywhere. I do
not need to live on this planet."/
/"Hum! Hum!"/ said the king. /"I have good reason to believe that
somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can
judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death.
Thus his life will depend on your justice. But you will pardon him on
each occasion; for he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we
have."/
/"I,"/ replied the little prince, /"do not like to condemn anyone to
death. And now I think I will go on my way."/
/"No,"/ said the king.
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for
departure, had no wish to grieve the old monarch.
/"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed,"/ he said, /"he should
be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for example,
to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that
conditions are favorable . . ."/
As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. Then,
with a sigh, he took his leave.
/"I make you my Ambassador,"/ the king called out, hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
/"The grown-ups are very strange,"/ the little prince said to himself,
as he continued on his journey.
XI
The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man.
The Conceited man
/"Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!"/ he exclaimed
from afar, when he first saw the little prince coming.
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers.
/"Good morning,"/ said the little prince. /"That is a queer hat you are
wearing."/
/"It is a hat for salutes,"/ the conceited man replied. /"It is to raise
in salute when people acclaim me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever
passes this way."/
/"Yes?"/ said the little prince, who did not understand what the
conceited man was talking about.
/"Clap your hands, one against the other,"/ the conceited man now
directed him.
The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in
a modest salute.
/"This is more entertaining than the visit to the king,"/ the little
prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands, one
against the other. The conceited man again raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the
game's monotony.
/"And what should one do to make the hat come down?"/ he asked.
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear
anything but praise.
/"Do you really admire me very much?"/ he demanded of the little prince.
/"What does that mean--'admire'?"/
/"To admire means that you regard me as the handsomest, the
best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet."/
/"But you are the only man on your planet!"/
/"Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same."/
/"I admire you,"/ said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders
slightly, /"but what is there in that to interest you so much?"/
And the little prince went away.
/"The grown-ups are certainly very odd,"/ he said to himself, as he
continued on his journey.
XII
The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit,
but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
/"What are you doing there?"/ he said to the tippler, whom he found
settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a
collection of full bottles.
Tippler
/"I am drinking,"/ replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air.
/"Why are you drinking?"/ demanded the little prince.
/"So that I may forget,"/ replied the tippler.
/"Forget what?"/ inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
/"Forget that I am ashamed,"/ the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
/"Ashamed of what?"/ insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
/"Ashamed of drinking!"/ The tipler brought his speech to an end, and
shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away, puzzled.
/"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd,"/ he said to himself, as
he continued on his journey.
XIII
The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much
occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
The businessman
/"Good morning,"/ the little prince said to him. /"Your cigarette has
gone out."/
/"Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three
make fifteen. Good morning. FIfteen and seven make twenty-two.
Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again.
Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew! Then that makes
five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand,
seven-hundred-thirty-one."/
/"Five hundred million what?"/ asked the little prince.
/"Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million--I can't stop .
. . I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I
don't amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven . . ."/
/"Five-hundred-and-one million what?"/ repeated the little prince, who
never in his life had let go of a question once he had asked it.
The businessman raised his head.
/"During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I have
been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years
ago, when some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the
most frightful noise that resounded all over the place, and I made four
mistakes in my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was
disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I
have no time for loafing. The third time--well, this is it! I was
saying, then, five-hundred-and-one millions--"/
/"Millions of what?"/
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left
in peace until he answered this question.
/"Millions of those little objects,"/ he said, /"which one sometimes
sees in the sky."/
/"Flies?"/
/"Oh, no. Little glittering objects."/
/"Bees?"/
/"Oh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As
for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for
idle dreaming in my life."/
/"Ah! You mean the stars?"/
/"Yes, that's it. The stars."/
/"And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?"/
/"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand,
seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I
am accurate."/
/"And what do you do with these stars?"/
/"What do I do with them?"/
/"Yes."/
/"Nothing. I own them."/
/"You own the stars?"/
/"Yes."/
/"But I have already seen a king who--"/
/"Kings do not own, they reign over. It is a very different matter."/
/"And what good does it do you to own the stars?"/
/"It does me the good of making me rich."/
/"And what good does it do you to be rich?"/
/"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are discovered."/
/"This man,"/ the little prince said to himself, /"reasons a little like
my poor tippler . . ."/
Nevertheless, he still had some more questions.
/"How is it possible for one to own the stars?"/
/"To whom do they belong?"/ the businessman retorted, peevishly.
/"I don't know. To nobody."/
/"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it."/
/"Is that all that is necessary?"/
/"Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is
yours. When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it is yours.
When you get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on it:
it is yours. So with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me
ever thought of owning them."/
/"Yes, that is true," said the little prince. "And what do you do with
them?"/
/"I administer them,"/ replied the businessman. /"I count them and
recount them. It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally
interested in matters of consequence."/
The little prince was still not satisfied.
/"If I owned a silk scarf,"/ he said, /"I could put it around my neck
and take it away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower
and take it away with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven . .
."/
/"No. But I can put them in the bank."/
/"Whatever does that mean?"/
/"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And
then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key."/
/"And that is all?"/
/"That is enough,"/ said the businessman.
/"It is entertaining,"/ thought the little prince. /"It is rather
poetic. But it is of no great consequence."/
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very
different from those of the grown-ups.
/"I myself own a flower,"/ he continued his conversation with the
businessman, /"which I water every day. I own three volcanoes, which I
clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one
never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes, and it is of some use
to my flower, that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars . . ."/
The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer.
And the little prince went away.
/"The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary,"/ he said
simply, talking to himself as he continued on his journey.
XIV
The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was
just enough room on it for a street lamp and a lamplighter. The little
prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp
and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens, on a planet which had no
people, and not one house. But he said to himself, nevertheless:
/"It may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so absurd as the
king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least
his work has some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if
he brought one more star to life, or one flower. When he puts out his
lamp, he sends the flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful
occupation. And since it is beautiful, it is truly useful."/
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.
/"Good morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?"/
/"Those are the orders,"/ replied the lamplighter. /"Good morning."/
/"What are the orders?"/
/"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."/
And he lighted his lamp again.
/"But why have you just lighted it again?"/
/"Those are the orders,"/ replied the lamplighter.
/"I do not understand,"/ said the little prince.
/"There is nothing to understand,"/ said the lamplighter. /"Orders are
orders. Good morning."/
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red squares.
/"I follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I
put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again.
I had the rest of the day for relaxation and the rest of the night for
sleep."/
/"And the orders have been changed since that time?"/
/"The orders have not been changed,"/ said the lamplighter. /"That is
the tragedy! From year to year the planet has turned more rapidly and
the orders have not been changed!"/
/"Then what?"/ asked the little prince.
/"Then--the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no
longer have a single second for repose. Once every minute I have to
light my lamp and put it out!"/
/"That is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!"/
/"It is not funny at all!"/ said the lamplighter. /"While we have been
talking together a month has gone by."/
/"A month?"/
/"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening."/
And he lighted his lamp again.
As the little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter
who was so faithful to his orders. He remembered the sunsets which he
himself had gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling up his chair;
and he wanted to help his friend.
/"You know,"/ he said, /"I can tell you a way you can rest whenever you
want to. . ."/
/"I always want to rest,"/ said the lamplighter.
For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at the same time.
The little prince went on with his explanation:
/"Your planet is so small that three strides will take you all the way
around it. To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather
slowly. When you want to rest, you will walk--and the day will last as
long as you like."/
/"That doesn't do me much good,"/ said the lamplighter. /"The one thing
I love in life is to sleep."/
/"Then you're unlucky,"/ said the little prince.
/"I am unlucky,"/ said the lamplighter. /"Good morning."/
The lamplighter
And he put out his lamp.
/"That man,"/ said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther
on his journey, /"that man would be scorned by all the others: by the
king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman.
Nevertheless he is the only one of them all who does not seem to me
ridiculous. Perhaps that is because he is thinking of something else
besides himself."/
He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again:
/"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend.
But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two
people. . ."/
What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most
of all to leave this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440
sunsets!
XV
The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was
inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books.
The geographer
/"Oh, look! Here is an explorer!"/ he exclaimed to himself when he saw
the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had
already traveled so much and so far!
/"Where do you come from?"/ the old gentleman said to him.
/"What is that big book?"/ said the little prince. "What are you doing?"
/"I am a geographer,"/ said the old gentleman.
/"What is a geographer?"/ asked the little prince.
/"A geographer is a scholar who knows the location of all the seas,
rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts."/
/"That is very interesting,"/ said the little prince. /"Here at last is
a man who has a real profession!"/ And he cast a look around him at the
planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet
that he had ever seen.
/"Your planet is very beautiful,"/ he said. /"Has it any oceans?"/
/"I couldn't tell you,"/ said the geographer.
/"Ah!"/ The little prince was disappointed. /"Has it any mountains?"/
/"I couldn't tell you,"/ said the geographer.
/"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"/
/"I couldn't tell you that, either."/
/"But you are a geographer!"/
/"Exactly,"/ the geographer said. /"But I am not an explorer. I haven't
a single explorer on my planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to
count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and
the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about.
He does not leave his desk. But he receives the explorers in his study.
He asks them questions, and he notes down what they recall of their
travels. And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting
to him, the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral
character."/
/"Why is that?"/
/"Because an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of
the geographer. So would an explorer who drank too much."/
/"Why is that?"/ asked the little prince.
/"Because intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note
down two mountains in a place where there was only one."/
/"I know some one,"/ said the little prince, /"who would make a bad
explorer."/
/"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is
shown to be good, an inquiry is ordered into his discovery."/
/"One goes to see it?"/
/"No. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to
furnish proofs. For example, if the discovery in question is that of a
large mountain, one requires that large stones be brought back from it."/
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement.
/"But you--you come from far away! You are an explorer! You shall
describe your planet to me!"/
And, having opened his big register, the geographer sharpened his
pencil. The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One
waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down
in ink.
/"Well?"/ said the geographer expectantly.
/"Oh, where I live,"/ said the little prince, /"it is not very
interesting. It is all so small. I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes
are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows."/
/"One never knows,"/ said the geographer.
/"I have also a flower."/
/"We do not record flowers,"/ said the geographer.
/"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!"/
/"We do not record them,"/ said the geographer, /"because they are
ephemeral."/
/"What does that mean--'ephemeral'?"/
/"Geographies,"/ said the geographer, /"are the books which, of all
books, are most concerned with matters of consequence. They never become
old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position.
It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write
of eternal things."/
/"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again,"/ the little prince
interrupted. /"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?"/
/"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for
us,"/ said the geographer. /"The thing that matters to us is the
mountain. It does not change."/
/"But what does that mean--'ephemeral'?"/ repeated the little prince,
who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it.
/"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance.'"/
/"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"/
/"Certainly it is."/
/"My flower is ephemeral,"/ the little prince said to himself, /"and she
has only four thorns to defend herself against the world. And I have
left her on my planet, all alone!"/
That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more.
/"What place would you advise me to visit now?"/ he asked.
/"The planet Earth,"/ replied the geographer. /"It has a good reputation."/
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower
XVI
So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can count, there, 111
kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000
geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000
conceited men--that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups.
To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that
before the invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over
the whole of the six continents, a veritable army of 462,511
lamplighters for the street lamps.
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle. The
movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in
the opera. First would come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand
and Australia. Having set their lamps alight, these would go off to
sleep. Next, the lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their
steps in the dance, and then they too would be waved back into the
wings. After that would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and
the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe; then those of South
America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And
never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the
stage. It would be magnificent.
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and
his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South
Pole--only these two would live free from toil and care: they would be
busy twice a year.
XVII
When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the
truth. I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about
the lamplighters. And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false
idea of our planet to those who do not know it. Men occupy a very small
place upon the Earth. If the two billion inhabitants who people its
surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, as they
do for some big public assembly, they could easily be put into one
public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. All humanity
could be piled up on a small Pacific islet.
The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that.
They imagine that they fill a great deal of space. They fancy themselves
as important as the baobabs. You should advise them, then, to make their
own calculations. They adore figures, and that will please them. But do
not waste your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I
know, confidence in me.
When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised
not to see any people. He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the
wrong planet, when a coil of gold, the color of the moonlight, flashed
across the sand.
/"Good evening,"/ said the little prince courteously.
/"Good evening,"/ said the snake.
/"What planet is this on which I have come down?"/ asked the little prince.
/"This is the Earth; this is Africa,"/ the snake answered.
/"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?"/
/"This is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is
large,"/ said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky.
/"I wonder,"/ he said, /"whether the stars are set alight in heaven so
that one day each one of us may find his own again . . . Look at my
planet. It is right there above us. But how far away it is!"/
v
/"It is beautiful,"/ the snake said. /"What has brought you here?"/
/"I have been having some trouble with a flower,"/ said the little prince.
/"Ah!"/ said the snake.
And they were both silent.
/"Where are the men?"/ the little prince at last took up the
conversation again. /"It is a little lonely in the desert . . ."/
/"It is also lonely among men,"/ the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
/"You are a funny animal,"/ he said at last. /"You are no thicker than a
finger . . ."/
/"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king,"/ said the snake.
The little prince smiled.
/"You are not very powerful. You haven't even any feet. You cannot even
travel . . ."/
/"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you,"/ said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet.
/"Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came,"/ the
snake spoke again. /"But you are innocent and true, and you come from a
star . . ."/
The little prince made no reply.
/"You move me to pity--you are so weak on this Earth made of granite,"/
the snake said. /"I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for
your own planet. I can--"/
/"Oh! I understand you very well,"/ said the little prince. /"But why do
you always speak in riddles?"/
/"I solve them all,"/ said the snake.
And they were both silent.
The Little prince and the snake
XVIII
The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. It
was a flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all.
"Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men?" the little prince asked, politely.
The flower had once seen a caravan passing.
"Men?" she echoed. "I think there are six or seven of them in existence.
I saw them, several years ago. But one never knows where to find them.
The wind blows them away. They have no roots, and that makes their life
very difficult."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower.
The flower
XIX
After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only
mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to
his knees. And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. "From a
mountain as high as this one," he said to himself, "I shall be able to
see the whole planet at one glance, and all the people . . ."
But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles.
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning--Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you?" said the little prince.
"Who are you--Who are you--Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone," he said.
"I am all alone--all alone--all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet!" he thought. "It is altogether dry, and altogether
pointed, and altogether harsh and forbidding. And the people have no
imagination. They repeat whatever one says to them . . . On my planet I
had a flower; she always was the first to speak . . ."
The echo
XX
But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and
rocks, and snow, the little prince at last came upon a road. And all
roads lead to the abodes of men.
/"Good morning,"/ he said.
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses.
/"Good morning,"/ said the roses.
The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower.
/"Who are you?"/ he demanded, thunderstruck.
/"We are roses,"/ the roses said.
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that she was
the only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five
thousand of them, all alike, in one single garden!
/"She would be very much annoyed,"/ he said to himself, /"if she should
see that . . . She would cough most dreadfully, and she would pretend
that she was dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be obliged
to pretend that I was nursing her back to life--for if I did not do
that, to humble myself also, she would really allow herself to die. . ."/
Then he went on with his reflections: /"I thought that I was rich, with
a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common
rose. A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees--and
one of them perhaps extinct forever . . . That doesn't make me a very
great prince . . ."/
And he lay down in the grass and cried.

Garden of the roses
XXI
It was then that the fox appeared.
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he
turned around he saw nothing.
"I am right here," the voice said, "under the apple tree."
The little prince lying on medow
/"Who are you?"/ asked the little prince, and added, /"You are very
pretty to look at."/
/"I am a fox,"/ the fox said.
/"Come and play with me,"/ proposed the little prince. /"I am so unhappy."/
/"I cannot play with you,"/ the fox said. /"I am not tamed."/
/"Ah! Please excuse me,"/ said the little prince.
But, after some thought, he added:
/"What does that mean--'tame'?"/
/"You do not live here,"/ said the fox. /"What is it that you are
looking for?"/
/"I am looking for men,"/ said the little prince. /"What does that
mean--'tame'?"/
/"Men,"/ said the fox. /"They have guns, and they hunt. It is very
disturbing. They also raise chickens. These are their only interests.
Are you looking for chickens?"/
/"No,"/ said the little prince. /"I am looking for friends. What does
that mean--'tame'?"/
/"It is an act too often neglected,"/ said the fox. /"It means to
establish ties."/
/"'To establish ties'?"/
/"Just that,"/ said the fox. /"To me, you are still nothing more than a
little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I
have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you,
I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if
you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in
all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world . . ."/
/"I am beginning to understand,"/ said the little prince. /"There is a
flower . . . I think that she has tamed me . . ."/
/"It is possible,"/ said the fox. /"On the Earth one sees all sorts of
things."/
/"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!"/ said the little prince.
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
/"On another planet?"/
/"Yes."/
/"Are there hunters on that planet?"/
/"No."/
/"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"/
/"No."/
/"Nothing is perfect,"/ sighed the fox.
But he came back to his idea.
/"My life is very monotonous,"/ the fox said. /"I hunt chickens; men
hunt me. All the chickens are just alike, and all the men are just
alike. And, in consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it
will be as if the sun came to shine on my life. I shall know the sound
of a step that will be different from all the others. Other steps send
me hurrying back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music,
out of my burrow. And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder? I
do not eat bread. Wheat is of no use to me. The wheat fields have
nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have hair that is the
color of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me!
The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you.
And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat . . ."/
The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time.
v
/"Please--tame me!"/ he said.
/"I want to, very much,"/ the little prince replied. /"But I have not
much time. I have friends to discover, and a great many things to
understand."/
/"One only understands the things that one tames,"/ said the fox. /"Men
have no more time to understand anything. They buy things all ready made
at the shops. But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy
friendship, and so men have no friends any more. If you want a friend,
tame me . . ."/
/"What must I do, to tame you?"/ asked the little prince.
/"You must be very patient,"/ replied the fox. /"First you will sit down
at a little distance from me--like that--in the grass. I shall look at
you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the
source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me,
every day . . ."/
The next day the little prince came back.
/"It would have been better to come back at the same hour,"/ said the
fox. /"If, for example, you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then
at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy. I shall feel happier and
happier as the hour advances. At four o'clock, I shall already be
worrying and jumping about. I shall show you how happy I am! But if you
come at just any time, I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be
ready to greet you . . . One must observe the proper rites . . ."/
/"What is a rite?"/ asked the little prince.
A hunter
/"Those also are actions too often neglected,"/ said the fox. /"They are
what make one day different from other days, one hour from other hours.
There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they
dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I
can take a walk as far as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at
just any time, every day would be like every other day, and I should
never have any vacation at all."/
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure
drew near--
/"Ah,"/ said the fox, /"I shall cry."/
/"It is your own fault,"/ said the little prince. /"I never wished you
any sort of harm; but you wanted me to tame you . . ."/
/"Yes, that is so,"/ said the fox.
/"But now you are going to cry!"/ said the little prince.
/"Yes, that is so,"/ said the fox.
/"Then it has done you no good at all!"/
/"It has done me good,"/ said the fox, /"because of the color of the
wheat fields."/ And then he added:
/"Go and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is
unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will
make you a present of a secret."/
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses.
/"You are not at all like my rose,"/ he said. /"As yet you are nothing.
No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox
when I first knew him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other
foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the
world."/
And the roses were very much embarassed.
/"You are beautiful, but you are empty,"/ he went on. /"One could not
die for you. To be sure, an ordinary passerby would think that my rose
looked just like you--the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone
she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because
it is she that I have watered; because it is she that I have put under
the glass globe; because it is she that I have sheltered behind the
screen; because it is for her that I have killed the caterpillars
(except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies); because
it is she that I have listened to, when she grumbled, or boasted, or
ever sometimes when she said nothing. Because she is /my/ rose./
And he went back to meet the fox.
/"Goodbye,"/ he said.
/"Goodbye,"/ said the fox. /"And now here is my secret, a very simple
secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is
essential is invisible to the eye."/
/"What is essential is invisible to the eye,"/ the little prince
repeated, so that he would be sure to remember.
/"It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so
important."/
/"It is the time I have wasted for my rose--"/ said the little prince,
so that he would be sure to remember.
/"Men have forgotten this truth,"/ said the fox. /"But you must not
forget it. You become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You
are responsible for your rose . . ."/
/"I am responsible for my rose,"/ the little prince repeated, so that he
would be sure to remember.
The Little prince
XXII
/"Good morning,"/ said the little prince.
/"Good morning"/, said the railway switchman.
/"What do you do here?"/ the little prince asked.
/"I sort out travelers, in bundles of a thousand"/ , said the switchman.
/"I send off the trains that carry them: now to the right, now to the
left."/
And a brilliantly lighted express train shook the switchman's cabin as
it rushed by with a roar like thunder.
/"They are in a great hurry,"/ said the little prince. /"What are they
looking for?"/
/"Not even the locomotive engineer knows that,"/ said the switchman.
And a second brilliantly lighted express thundered by, in the opposite
direction.
/"Are they coming back already?"/ demanded the little prince.
/"These are not the same ones,"/ said the switchman. /"It is an exchange."/
/"Were they not satisfied where they were?"/ asked the little prince.
/"No one is ever satisfied where he is,"/ said the switchman.
And they heard the roaring thunder of a third brilliantly lighted express.
/"Are they pursuing the first travelers?"/ demanded the little prince.
/"They are pursuing nothing at all,"/ said the switchman. /"They are
asleep in there, or if they are not asleep they are yawning. Only the
children are flattening their noses against the windowpanes."/
/"Only the children know what they are looking for,"/ said the little
prince. /"They waste their time over a rag doll and it becomes very
important to them; and if anybody takes it away from them, they cry . . ."/
/"They are lucky,"/ the switchman said.
XXIII
/"Good morning,"/ said the little prince.
/"Good morning,"/ said the merchant.
This was a merchant who sold pills that had been invented to quench
thirst. You need only swallow one pill a week, and you would feel no
need of anything to drink.
/"Why are you selling those?"/ asked the little prince.
/"Because they save a tremendous amount of time,"/ said the merchant.
/"Computations have been made by experts. With these pills, you save
fifty-three minutes in every week."/
/"And what do I do with those fifty-three minutes?"/
/"Anything you like . . ."/
/"As for me," said the little prince to himself, "if I had fifty-three
minutes to spend as I liked, I should walk at my leisure toward a spring
of fresh water."/
The Little prince
XXIV
It was now the eighth day since I had had my accident in the desert, and
I had listened to the story of the merchant as I was drinking the last
drop of my water supply.
/"Ah,"/ I said to the little prince, /"these memories of yours are very
charming; but I have not yet succeeded in repairing my plane; I have
nothing more to drink; and I, too, should be very happy if I could walk
at my leisure toward a spring of fresh water!"/
/"My friend the fox--"/ the little prince said to me.
/"My dear little man, this is no longer a matter that has anything to do
with the fox!"/
/"Why not?"/
/"Because I am about to die of thirst . . ."/
He did not follow my reasoning, and he answered me:
/"It is a good thing to have had a friend, even if one is about to die.
I, for instance, am very glad to have had a fox as a friend . . ."/
/"He has no way of guessing the danger,"/ I said to myself. /"He has
never been either hungry or thirsty. A little sunshine is all he needs .
. ."/
But he looked at me steadily, and replied to my thought:
/"I am thirsty, too. Let us look for a well . . ."/
I made a gesture of weariness. It is absurd to look for a well, at
random, in the immensity of the desert. But nevertheless we started
walking.
When we had trudged along for several hours, in silence, the darkness
fell, and the stars began to come out. Thirst had made me a little
feverish, and I looked at them as if I were in a dream. The little
prince's last words came reeling back into my memory:
/"Then you are thirsty, too?"/ I demanded.
But he did not reply to my question. He merely said to me:
/"Water may also be good for the heart . . ."/
I did not understand this answer, but I said nothing. I knew very well
that it was impossible to cross-examine him.
He was tired. He sat down. I sat down beside him. And, after a little
silence, he spoke again:
/"The stars are beautiful, because of a flower that cannot be seen."/
I replied, /"Yes, that is so."/ And, without saying anything more, I
looked across the ridges of sand that were stretched out before us in
the moonlight.
/"The desert is beautiful,"/ the little prince added.
And that was true. I have always loved the desert. One sits down on a
desert sand dune, sees nothing, hears nothing. Yet through the silence
something throbs, and gleams . . .
/"What makes the desert beautiful,"/ said the little prince, /"is that
somewhere it hides a well . . ."/
I was astonished by a sudden understanding of that mysterious radiation
of the sands. When I was a little boy I lived in an old house, and
legend told us that a treasure was buried there. To be sure, no one had
ever known how to find it; perhaps no one had ever even looked for it.
But it cast an enchantment over that house. My home was hiding a secret
in the depths of its heart . . .
/"Yes,"/ I said to the little prince. /"The house, the stars, the
desert--what gives them their beauty is something that is invisible!"/
/"I am glad,"/ he said, /"that you agree with my fox."/
As the little prince dropped off to sleep, I took him in my arms and set
out walking once more. I felt deeply moved, and stirred. It seemed to me
that I was carrying a very fragile treasure. It seemed to me, even, that
there was nothing more fragile on all Earth. In the moonlight I looked
at his pale forehead, his closed eyes, his locks of hair that trembled
in the wind, and I said to myself: /"What I see here is nothing but a
shell. What is most important is invisible . . ."/
As his lips opened slightly with the suspicion of a half-smile, I said
to myself, again: /"What moves me so deeply, about this little prince
who is sleeping here, is his loyalty to a flower--the image of a rose
that shines through his whole being like the flame of a lamp, even when
he is asleep . . ."/ And I felt him to be more fragile still. I felt the
need of protecting him, as if he himself were a flame that might be
extinguished by a little puff of wind . . .
And, as I walked on so, I found the well, at daybreak.
XXV
/"Men,"/ said the little prince, /"set out on their way in express
trains, but they do not know what they are looking for. Then they rush
about, and get excited, and turn round and round . . ."/
And he added:
/"It is not worth the trouble . . ."/
The well that we had come to was not like the wells of the Sahara. The
wells of the Sahara are mere holes dug in the sand. This one was like a
well in a village. But there was no village here, and I thought I must
be dreaming . . .
/"It is strange,"/ I said to the little prince. /"Everything is ready
for use: the pulley, the bucket, the rope . . ."/
He laughed, touched the rope, and set the pulley to working. And the
pulley moaned, like an old weathervane which the wind has long since
forgotten.
/"Do you hear?"/ said the little prince. /"We have wakened the well, and
it is singing . . ."/
I did not want him to tire himself with the rope.
/"Leave it to me,"/ I said. /"It is too heavy for you."/
I hoisted the bucket slowly to the edge of the well and set it
there--happy, tired as I was, over my achievement. The song of the
pulley was still in my ears, and I could see the sunlight shimmer in the
still trembling water.
/"I am thirsty for this water,"/ said the little prince. /"Give me some
of it to drink . . ."/
And I understood what he had been looking for.
I raised the bucket to his lips. He drank, his eyes closed. It was as
sweet as some special festival treat. This water was indeed a different
thing from ordinary nourishment. Its sweetness was born of the walk
under the stars, the song of the pulley, the effort of my arms. It was
good for the heart, like a present. When I was a little boy, the lights
of the Christmas tree, the music of the Midnight Mass, the tenderness of
smiling faces, used to make up, so, the radiance of the gifts I received.
/"The men where you live,"/ said the little prince, /"raise five
thousand roses in the same garden--and they do not find in it what they
are looking for."/
/"They do not find it,"/ I replied.
/"And yet what they are looking for could be found in one single rose,
or in a little water."/
/"Yes, that is true,"/ I said.
And the little prince added:
/"But the eyes are blind. One must look with the heart . . ."/
I had drunk the water. I breathed easily. At sunrise the sand is the
color of honey. And that honey color was making me happy, too. What
brought me, then, this sense of grief?
/"You must keep your promise,"/ said the little prince, softly, as he
sat down beside me once more.
/"What promise?"/
/"You know--a muzzle for my sheep . . . I am responsible for this flower
. . ."/
I took my rough drafts of drawings out of my pocket. The little prince
looked them over, and laughed as he said:
/"Your baobabs--they look a little like cabbages."/
/"Oh!"/
I had been so proud of my baobabs!
/"Your fox--his ears look a little like horns; and they are too long."/
And he laughed again.
/"You are not fair, little prince,"/ I said. /"I don't know how to draw
anything except boa constrictors from the outside and boa constrictors
from the inside."/
/"Oh, that will be all right,"/ he said, /"children understand."/
The Little prince
So then I made a pencil sketch of a muzzle. And as I gave it to him my
heart was torn.
/"You have plans that I do not know about,"/ I said.
But he did not answer me. He said to me, instead:
/"You know--my descent to the earth . . . Tomorrow will be its
anniversary."/
Then, after a silence, he went on:
/"I came down very near here."/
And he flushed.
And once again, without understanding why, I had a queer sense of
sorrow. One question, however, occurred to me:
/"Then it was not by chance that on the morning when I first met you--a
week ago--you were strolling along like that, all alone, a thousand
miles from any inhabited region? You were on the your back to the place
where you landed?"/
The little prince flushed again.
And I added, with some hesitancy:
/"Perhaps it was because of the anniversary?"/
The little prince flushed once more. He never answered questions--but
when one flushes does that not mean "Yes"?
/"Ah,"/ I said to him, /"I am a little frightened--"/
But he interrupted me.
/"Now you must work. You must return to your engine. I will be waiting
for you here. Come back tomorrow evening . . ."/
But I was not reassured. I remembered the fox. One runs the risk of
weeping a little, if one lets himself be tamed . . .
XXVI
Beside the well there was the ruin of an old stone wall. When I came
back from my work, the next evening, I saw from some distance away my
little price sitting on top of a wall, with his feet dangling. And I
heard him say:
/"Then you don't remember. This is not the exact spot."/
Another voice must have answered him, for he replied to it:
/"Yes, yes! It is the right day, but this is not the place."/
I continued my walk toward the wall. At no time did I see or hear
anyone. The little prince, however, replied once again:
/"--Exactly. You will see where my track begins, in the sand. You have
nothing to do but wait for me there. I shall be there tonight."/
I was only twenty meters from the wall, and I still saw nothing.
After a silence the little prince spoke again:
/"You have good poison? You are sure that it will not make me suffer too
long?"/
I stopped in my tracks, my heart torn asunder; but still I did not
understand.
/"Now go away,"/ said the little prince. /"I want to get down from the
wall."/
I dropped my eyes, then, to the foot of the wall--and I leaped into the
air. There before me, facing the little prince, was one of those yellow
snakes that take just thirty seconds to bring your life to an end. Even
as I was digging into my pocked to get out my revolver I made a running
step back. But, at the noise I made, the snake let himself flow easily
across the sand like the dying spray of a fountain, and, in no apparent
hurry, disappeared, with a light metallic sound, among the stones.
I reached the wall just in time to catch my little man in my arms; his
face was white as snow.
/"What does this mean?"/ I demanded. /"Why are you talking with snakes?"/
I had loosened the golden muffler that he always wore. I had moistened
his temples, and had given him some water to drink. And now I did not
dare ask him any more questions. He looked at me very gravely, and put
his arms around my neck. I felt his heart beating like the heart of a
dying bird, shot with someone's rifle . . .
/"I am glad that you have found what was the matter with your engine,"/
he said. /"Now you can go back home--"/
/"How do you know about that?"/
I was just coming to tell him that my work had been successful, beyond
anything that I had dared to hope.
He made no answer to my question, but he added:
/"I, too, am going back home today . . ."/
Then, sadly--
/"It is much farther . . . It is much more difficult . . ."/
I realized clearly that something extraordinary was happening. I was
holding him close in my arms as if he were a little child; and yet it
seemed to me that he was rushing headlong toward an abyss from which I
could do nothing to restrain him . . .
His look was very serious, like some one lost far away.
/"I have your sheep. And I have the sheep's box. And I have the muzzle .
. ."/
And he gave me a sad smile.
I waited a long time. I could see that he was reviving little by little.
/"Dear little man,"/ I said to him, /"you are afraid . . ."/
He was afraid, there was no doubt about that. But he laughed lightly.
/"I shall be much more afraid this evening . . ."/
The wall
Once again I felt myself frozen by the sense of something irreparable.
And I knew that I could not bear the thought of never hearing that
laughter any more. For me, it was like a spring of fresh water in the
desert.
/"Little man,"/ I said, /"I want to hear you laugh again."/
But he said to me:
/"Tonight, it will be a year . . . My star, then, can be found right
above the place where I came to the Earth, a year ago . . ."/
/"Little man,"/ I said, /"tell me that it is only a bad dream--this
affair of the snake, and the meeting-place, and the star . . ."/
But he did not answer my plea. He said to me, instead:
/"The thing that is important is the thing that is not seen . . ."/
/"Yes, I know . . ."/
/"It is just as it is with the flower. If you love a flower that lives
on a star, it is sweet to look at the sky at night. All the stars are
a-bloom with flowers . . ."/
/"Yes, I know . . ."/
/"It is just as it is with the water. Because of the pulley, and the
rope, what you gave me to drink was like music. You remember--how good
it was."/
/"Yes, I know . . ."/
/"And at night you will look up at the stars. Where I live everything is
so small that I cannot show you where my star is to be found. It is
better, like that. My star will just be one of the stars, for you. And
so you will love to watch all the stars in the heavens . . . they will
all be your friends. And, besides, I am going to make you a present . . ."/
He laughed again.
/"Ah, little prince, dear little prince! I love to hear that laughter!"/
/"That is my present. Just that. It will be as it was when we drank the
water . . ."/
/"What are you trying to say?"/
/"All men have the stars,"/ he answered, /"but they are not the same
things for different people. For some, who are travelers, the stars are
guides. For others they are no more than little lights in the sky. For
others, who are scholars, they are problems. For my businessman they
were wealth. But all these stars are silent. You--you alone--will have
the stars as no one else has them--"/
/"What are you trying to say?"/
/"In one of the stars I shall be living. In one of them I shall be
laughing. And so it will be as if all the stars were laughing, when you
look at the sky at night . . . You--only you--will have stars that can
laugh!"/
And he laughed again.
The Little prince
/"And when your sorrow is comforted (time soothes all sorrows) you will
be content that you have known me. You will always be my friend. You
will want to laugh with me. And you will sometimes open your window, so,
for that pleasure . . . And your friends will be properly astonished to
see you laughing as you look up at the sky! Then you will say to them,
'Yes, the stars always make me laugh!' And they will think you are
crazy. It will be a very shabby trick that I shall have played on you .
. ."/
And he laughed again.
/"It will be as if, in place of the stars, I had given you a great
number of little bells that knew how to laugh . . ."/
And he laughed again. Then he quickly became serious:
/"Tonight--you know . . . Do not come."/
/"I shall not leave you,"/ I said.
/"I shall look as if I were suffering. I shall look a little as if I
were dying. It is like that. Do not come to see that. It is not worth
the trouble . . ."/
/"I shall not leave you."/
But he was worried.
/"I tell you--it is also because of the snake. He must not bite you.
Snakes--they are malicious creatures. This one might bite you just for
fun . . ."/
/"I shall not leave you."/
But a thought came to reassure him:
/"It is true that they have no more poison for a second bite."/
The Little prince with his star
That night I did not see him set out on his way. He got away from me
without making a sound. When I succeeded in catching up with him he was
walking along with a quick and resolute step. He said to me merely:
/"Ah! You are there . . ."/
And he took me by the hand. But he was still worrying.
/"It was wrong of you to come. You will suffer. I shall look as if I
were dead; and that will not be true . . ."/
I said nothing.
/"You understand . . . it is too far. I cannot carry this body with me.
It is too heavy."/
I said nothing.
/"But it will be like an old abandoned shell. There is nothing sad about
old shells . . ."/
I said nothing.
He was a little discouraged. But he made one more effort:
/"You know, it will be very nice. I, too, shall look at the stars. All
the stars will be wells with a rusty pulley. All the stars will pour out
fresh water for me to drink . . ."/
I said nothing.
/"That will be so amusing! You will have five hundred million little
bells, and I shall have five hundred million springs of fresh water . . ."/
And he too said nothing more, becuase he was crying . . .
/"Here it is. Let me go on by myself."/
And he sat down, because he was afraid. Then he said, again:
/"You know--my flower . . . I am responsible for her. And she is so
weak! She is so nave! She has four thorns, of no use at all, to protect
herself against all the world . . ."/
I too sat down, because I was not able to stand up any longer.
/"There now--that is all . . ."/
He still hesitated a little; then he got up. He took one step. I could
not move.
There was nothing but a flash of yellow close to his ankle. He remained
motionless for an instant. He did not cry out. He fell as gently as a
tree falls. There was not even any sound, because of the sand.
Death
XXVII
And now six years have already gone by . . . I have never yet told this
story. The companions who met me on my return were well content to see
me alive. I was sad, but I told them: /"I am tired."/
Now my sorrow is comforted a little. That is to say--not entirely. But I
know that he did go back to his planet, because I did not find his body
at daybreak. It was not such a heavy body . . . and at night I love to
listen to the stars. It is like five hundred million little bells . . .
But there is one extraordinary thing . . . when I drew the muzzle for
the little prince, I forgot to add the leather strap to it. He will
never have been able to fasten it on his sheep. So now I keep wondering:
what is happening on his planet? Perhaps the sheep has eaten the flower
. . .
At one time I say to myself: /"Surely not! The little prince shuts his
flower under her glass globe every night, and he watches over his sheep
very carefully . . ."/ Then I am happy. And there is sweetness in the
laughter of all the stars.
But at another time I say to myself: /"At some moment or other one is
absent-minded, and that is enough! On some one evening he forgot the
glass globe, or the sheep got out, without making any noise, in the
night . . ."/ And then the little bells are changed to tears . . .
Here, then, is a great mystery. For you who also love the little prince,
and for me, nothing in the universe can be the same if somewhere, we do
not know where, a sheep that we never saw has--yes or no?--eaten a rose
. . .
Look up at the sky. Ask yourselves: is it yes or no? Has the sheep eaten
the flower? And you will see how everything changes . . .
And no grown-up will ever understand that this is a matter of so much
importance!
The loveliest and saddest landscape in the world
/This is, to me, the loveliest and saddest landscape in the world. It is
the same as that on the preceding page, but I have drawn it again to
impress it on your memory. It is here that the little prince appeared on
Earth, and disappeared./
/Look at it carefully so that you will be sure to recognize it in case
you travel some day to the African desert. And, if you should come upon
this spot, please do not hurry on. Wait for a time, exactly under the
star. Then, if a little man appears who laughs, who has golden hair and
who refuses to answer questions, you will know who he is. If this should
happen, please comfort me. Send me word that he has come back./

Title:      Animal Farm
Author:     George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair) (1903-1950)




Chapter I



Mr. Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but
was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of light
from his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard,
kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beer
from the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, where
Mrs. Jones was already snoring.

As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a
fluttering all through the farm buildings. Word had gone round during the
day that old Major, the prize Middle White boar, had had a strange dream
on the previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals.
It had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon as
Mr. Jones was safely out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called,
though the name under which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty)
was so highly regarded on the farm that everyone was quite ready to lose
an hour's sleep in order to hear what he had to say.

At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major was
already ensconced on his bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from a
beam. He was twelve years old and had lately grown rather stout, but he
was still a majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent appearance in
spite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. Before long the
other animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after their
different fashions. First came the three dogs, Bluebell, Jessie, and
Pincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the straw immediately in
front of the platform. The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,
the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down
behind the pigs and began to chew the cud. The two cart-horses, Boxer and
Clover, came in together, walking very slowly and setting down their vast
hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some small animal
concealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching
middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
Boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as
any two ordinary horses put together. A white stripe down his nose gave
him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate
intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of
character and tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel,
the white goat, and Benjamin, the donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animal
on the farm, and the worst tempered. He seldom talked, and when he did, it
was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that
God had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner
have had no tail and no flies. Alone among the animals on the farm he
never laughed. If asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.
Nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to Boxer; the
two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small paddock
beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from
side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. Clover
made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings
nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. At the last moment
Mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. She took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. Last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between Boxer and Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept
on a perch behind the back door. When Major saw that they had all made
themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat
and began:

"Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last
night. But I will come to the dream later. I have something else to say
first. I do not think, comrades, that I shall be with you for many months
longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdom
as I have acquired. I have had a long life, I have had much time for
thought as I lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I
understand the nature of life on this earth as well as any animal now
living. It is about this that I wish to speak to you.

"Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it:
our lives are miserable, laborious, and short. We are born, we are given
just so much food as will keep the breath in our bodies, and those of us
who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our strength;
and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are
slaughtered with hideous cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaning
of happiness or leisure after he is a year old. No animal in England is
free. The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is the plain truth.

"But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this land
of ours is so poor that it cannot afford a decent life to those who dwell
upon it? No, comrades, a thousand times no! The soil of England is
fertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundance
to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it. This
single farm of ours would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of
sheep--and all of them living in a comfort and a dignity that are now
almost beyond our imagining. Why then do we continue in this miserable
condition? Because nearly the whole of the produce of our labour is stolen
from us by human beings. There, comrades, is the answer to all our
problems. It is summed up in a single word--Man. Man is the only real
enemy we have. Remove Man from the scene, and the root cause of hunger and
overwork is abolished for ever.

"Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does not
give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he
cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all the
animals. He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum that
will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Our
labour tills the soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of
us that owns more than his bare skin. You cows that I see before me, how
many thousands of gallons of milk have you given during this last year?
And what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding up
sturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies.
And you hens, how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how many
of those eggs ever hatched into chickens? The rest have all gone to market
to bring in money for Jones and his men. And you, Clover, where are those
four foals you bore, who should have been the support and pleasure of your
old age? Each was sold at a year old--you will never see one of them
again. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the
fields, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall?

"And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their
natural span. For myself I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones.
I am twelve years old and have had over four hundred children. Such is the
natural life of a pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end.
You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will
scream your lives out at the block within a year. To that horror we all
must come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. Even the horses and the dogs
have no better fate. You, Boxer, the very day that those great muscles of
yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cut
your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. As for the dogs, when
they grow old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and
drowns them in the nearest pond.

"Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life
of ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, and
the produce of our labour would be our own. Almost overnight we could
become rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work night and day, body
and soul, for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to you,
comrades: Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might
be in a week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this
straw beneath my feet, that sooner or later justice will be done. Fix your
eyes on that, comrades, throughout the short remainder of your lives! And
above all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after you, so
that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.

"And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argument
must lead you astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and the
animals have a common interest, that the prosperity of the one is the
prosperity of the others. It is all lies. Man serves the interests of no
creature except himself. And among us animals let there be perfect unity,
perfect comradeship in the struggle. All men are enemies. All animals are
comrades."

At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speaking
four large rats had crept out of their holes and were sitting on their
hindquarters, listening to him. The dogs had suddenly caught sight of
them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats saved
their lives. Major raised his trotter for silence.

"Comrades," he said, "here is a point that must be settled. The wild
creatures, such as rats and rabbits--are they our friends or our enemies?
Let us put it to the vote. I propose this question to the meeting: Are
rats comrades?"

The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority
that rats were comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogs
and the cat, who was afterwards discovered to have voted on both sides.
Major continued:

"I have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty of
enmity towards Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs is an
enemy. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. And
remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not come to resemble
him. Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No animal
must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink
alcohol, or smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All the
habits of Man are evil. And, above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over
his own kind. Weak or strong, clever or simple, we are all brothers. No
animal must ever kill any other animal. All animals are equal.

"And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannot
describe that dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be when
Man has vanished. But it reminded me of something that I had long
forgotten. Many years ago, when I was a little pig, my mother and the
other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and
the first three words. I had known that tune in my infancy, but it had
long since passed out of my mind. Last night, however, it came back to me
in my dream. And what is more, the words of the song also came back-words,
I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago and have been
lost to memory for generations. I will sing you that song now, comrades.
I am old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you
can sing it better for yourselves. It is called 'Beasts of England'."

Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voice
was hoarse, but he sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, something
between 'Clementine' and 'La Cucaracha'. The words ran:

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken to my joyful tidings
Of the golden future time.

Soon or late the day is coming,
Tyrant Man shall be o'erthrown,
And the fruitful fields of England
Shall be trod by beasts alone.

Rings shall vanish from our noses,
And the harness from our back,
Bit and spur shall rust forever,
Cruel whips no more shall crack.

Riches more than mind can picture,
Wheat and barley, oats and hay,
Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels
Shall be ours upon that day.

Bright will shine the fields of England,
Purer shall its waters be,
Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes
On the day that sets us free.

For that day we all must labour,
Though we die before it break;
Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,
All must toil for freedom's sake.

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken well and spread my tidings
Of the golden future time.


The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement.
Almost before Major had reached the end, they had begun singing it for
themselves. Even the stupidest of them had already picked up the tune and
a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs and dogs,
they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after a
few preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into 'Beasts of England' in
tremendous unison. The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep
bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. They were so
delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in
succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not
been interrupted.

Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr. Jones, who sprang out of bed, making
sure that there was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which always
stood in a corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shot
into the darkness. The pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barn
and the meeting broke up hurriedly. Everyone fled to his own
sleeping-place. The birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled
down in the straw, and the whole farm was asleep in a moment.




Chapter II



Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body was
buried at the foot of the orchard.

This was early in March. During the next three months there was much
secret activity. Major's speech had given to the more intelligent animals
on the farm a completely new outlook on life. They did not know when the
Rebellion predicted by Major would take place, they had no reason for
thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly
that it was their duty to prepare for it. The work of teaching and
organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally
recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. Pre-eminent among the
pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon, whom Mr. Jones was
breeding up for sale. Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but
with a reputation for getting his own way. Snowball was a more vivacious
pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not
considered to have the same depth of character. All the other male pigs on
the farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig named
Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a
shrill voice. He was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some
difficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whisking
his tail which was somehow very persuasive. The others said of Squealer
that he could turn black into white.

These three had elaborated old Major's teachings into a complete system of
thought, to which they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week,
after Mr. Jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn and
expounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At the beginning they
met with much stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the duty
of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as "Master," or made
elementary remarks such as "Mr. Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we should
starve to death." Others asked such questions as "Why should we care what
happens after we are dead?" or "If this Rebellion is to happen anyway,
what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigs
had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the
spirit of Animalism. The stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie,
the white mare. The very first question she asked Snowball was: "Will
there still be sugar after the Rebellion?"

"No," said Snowball firmly. "We have no means of making sugar on this
farm. Besides, you do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked Mollie.

"Comrade," said Snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. Can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbons?"

Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by
Moses, the tame raven. Moses, who was Mr. Jones's especial pet, was a spy
and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. He claimed to know of
the existence of a mysterious country called Sugarcandy Mountain, to which
all animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain it
was Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and
lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Moses
because he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed in
Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them
that there was no such place.

Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover.
These two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,
but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed
everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by
simple arguments. They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret
meetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'Beasts of England', with
which the meetings always ended.

Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more
easily than anyone had expected. In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard
master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days.
He had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had
taken to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time he
would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers,
drinking, and occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in
beer. His men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the
buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals were
underfed.

June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer's Eve,
which was a Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at
the Red Lion that he did not come back till midday on Sunday. The men had
milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting,
without bothering to feed the animals. When Mr. Jones got back he
immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the
World over his face, so that when evening came, the animals were still
unfed. At last they could stand it no longer. One of the cows broke in the
door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals began to help
themselves from the bins. It was just then that Mr. Jones woke up. The
next moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their
hands, lashing out in all directions. This was more than the hungry
animals could bear. With one accord, though nothing of the kind had been
planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their tormentors. Jones and
his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all sides.
The situation was quite out of their control. They had never seen animals
behave like this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they
were used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened them
almost out of their wits. After only a moment or two they gave up trying
to defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all five of
them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road,
with the animals pursuing them in triumph.

Mrs. Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening,
hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of
the farm by another way. Moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her,
croaking loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones and his men out on
to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almost
before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully
carried through: Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.

For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good
fortune. Their first act was to gallop in a body right round the
boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human being
was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings to
wipe out the last traces of Jones's hated reign. The harness-room at the
end of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the
dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr. Jones had been used to
castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. The reins, the
halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the
rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. So were the whips. All the
animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.
Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"Ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark
of a human being. All animals should go naked."

When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of Mr. Jones. Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and
served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for
each dog. Then they sang 'Beasts of England' from end to end seven times
running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they
had never slept before.

But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious
thing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. A
little way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view of
most of the farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and gazed round them
in the clear morning light. Yes, it was theirs--everything that they could
see was theirs! In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and
round, they hurled themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement.
They rolled in the dew, they cropped mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass,
they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its rich scent. Then
they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with
speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool,
the spinney. It was as though they had never seen these things before, and
even now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.

Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside
the door of the farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightened
to go inside. After a moment, however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the
door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,
walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet,
the lithograph of Queen Victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. They
were just coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be missing.
Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best
bedroom. She had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones's
dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from Boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
A unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called
them together again.

"Comrades," said Snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. Today we begin the hay harvest. But there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged
to Mr. Jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to
the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for it
was Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two
knuckles of his trotter, painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of the
gate and in its place painted ANIMAL FARM. This was to be the name of the
farm from now onwards. After this they went back to the farm buildings,
where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be set
against the end wall of the big barn. They explained that by their studies
of the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles
of Animalism to Seven Commandments. These Seven Commandments would now be
inscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all the
animals on Animal Farm must live for ever after. With some difficulty
(for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) Snowball
climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding
the paint-pot. The Commandments were written on the tarred wall in great
white letters that could be read thirty yards away. They ran thus:


THE SEVEN COMMANDMENTS

1. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.
2. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend.
3. No animal shall wear clothes.
4. No animal shall sleep in a bed.
5. No animal shall drink alcohol.
6. No animal shall kill any other animal.
7. All animals are equal.


It was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind"
and one of the "S's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all
the way through. Snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. All
the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once
began to learn the Commandments by heart.

"Now, comrades," cried Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to the
hayfield! Let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more
quickly than Jones and his men could do."

But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time
past, set up a loud lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-four
hours, and their udders were almost bursting. After a little thought, the
pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their
trotters being well adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable
interest.

"What is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.

"Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.

"Never mind the milk, comrades!" cried Napoleon, placing himself in front
of the buckets. "That will be attended to. The harvest is more important.
Comrade Snowball will lead the way. I shall follow in a few minutes.
Forward, comrades! The hay is waiting."

So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when
they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.




Chapter III



How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were
rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.

Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human
beings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was
able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. But the pigs
were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. As
for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood
the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had
ever done. The pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised the
others. With their superior knowledge it was natural that they should
assume the leadership. Boxer and Clover would harness themselves to the
cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of
course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking
behind and calling out "Gee up, comrade!" or "Whoa back, comrade!" as the
case might be. And every animal down to the humblest worked at turning the
hay and gathering it. Even the ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day in
the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. In the end they
finished the harvest in two days' less time than it had usually taken
Jones and his men. Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had
ever seen. There was no wastage whatever; the hens and ducks with their
sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And not an animal on the
farm had stolen so much as a mouthful.

All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The
animals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be. Every
mouthful of food was an acute positive pleasure, now that it was truly
their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves, not doled out
to them by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beings
gone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too,
inexperienced though the animals were. They met with many difficulties--for
instance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to
tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with their
breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs with
their cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them
through. Boxer was the admiration of everybody. He had been a hard worker
even in Jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one;
there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on his
mighty shoulders. From morning to night he was pushing and pulling, always
at the spot where the work was hardest. He had made an arrangement with
one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than
anyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to
be most needed, before the regular day's work began. His answer to every
problem, every setback, was "I will work harder!"--which he had adopted as
his personal motto.

But everyone worked according to his capacity. The hens and ducks, for
instance, saved five bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the
stray grains. Nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, the
quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal features of life
in the old days had almost disappeared. Nobody shirked--or almost nobody.
Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a
way of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in her
hoof. And the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. It was soon
noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.
She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in
the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. But she
always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it
was impossible not to believe in her good intentions. Old Benjamin, the
donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the Rebellion. He did his work in the
same slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones's time, never shirking
and never volunteering for extra work either. About the Rebellion and its
results he would express no opinion. When asked whether he was not happier
now that Jones was gone, he would say only "Donkeys live a long time. None
of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with
this cryptic answer.

On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and
after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without
fail. First came the hoisting of the flag. Snowball had found in the
harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones's and had painted on it
a hoof and a horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse
garden every Sunday morning. The flag was green, Snowball explained, to
represent the green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signified
the future Republic of the Animals which would arise when the human race
had been finally overthrown. After the hoisting of the flag all the
animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known
as the Meeting. Here the work of the coming week was planned out and
resolutions were put forward and debated. It was always the pigs who put
forward the resolutions. The other animals understood how to vote, but
could never think of any resolutions of their own. Snowball and Napoleon
were by far the most active in the debates. But it was noticed that these
two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the
other could be counted on to oppose it. Even when it was resolved--a thing
no one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behind
the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was a
stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. The
Meeting always ended with the singing of 'Beasts of England', and the
afternoon was given up to recreation.

The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.
Here, in the evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other
necessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse.
Snowball also busied himself with organising the other animals into what
he called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He formed the
Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the
cows, the Wild Comrades' Re-education Committee (the object of this was to
tame the rats and rabbits), the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and
various others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. On the
whole, these projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wild
creatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately. They continued to
behave very much as before, and when treated with generosity, simply took
advantage of it. The cat joined the Re-education Committee and was very
active in it for some days. She was seen one day sitting on a roof and
talking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach. She was telling
them that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chose
could come and perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.

The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By the
autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.

As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogs
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything
except the Seven Commandments. Muriel, the goat, could read somewhat
better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the
evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
Benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
So far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. Clover learnt
the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. Boxer could not get
beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears
back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to
remember what came next and never succeeding. On several occasions,
indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew them, it was
always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided
to be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once
or twice every day to refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any but
the six letters which spelt her own name. She would form these very neatly
out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two
and walk round them admiring them.

None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A.
It was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and
ducks, were unable to learn the Seven Commandments by heart. After much
thought Snowball declared that the Seven Commandments could in effect be
reduced to a single maxim, namely: "Four legs good, two legs bad." This,
he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever had
thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds at
first objected, since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but
Snowball proved to them that this was not so.

"A bird's wing, comrades," he said, "is an organ of propulsion and not of
manipulation. It should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishing
mark of man is the HAND, the instrument with which he does all his
mischief."

The birds did not understand Snowball's long words, but they accepted his
explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new
maxim by heart. FOUR LEGS GOOD, TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end
wall of the barn, above the Seven Commandments and in bigger letters. When
they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this
maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating
"Four legs good, two legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it
up for hours on end, never growing tired of it.

Napoleon took no interest in Snowball's committees. He said that the
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done
for those who were already grown up. It happened that Jessie and Bluebell
had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to
nine sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them away
from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for
their education. He took them up into a loft which could only be reached
by a ladder from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusion
that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.

The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixed
every day into the pigs' mash. The early apples were now ripening, and the
grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. The animals had assumed
as a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day,
however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected
and brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some of
the other animals murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in full
agreement on this point, even Snowball and Napoleon. Squealer was sent to
make the necessary explanations to the others.

"Comrades!" he cried. "You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing
this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike
milk and apples. I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking these
things is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved by
Science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the
well-being of a pig. We pigs are brainworkers. The whole management and
organisation of this farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching over
your welfare. It is for YOUR sake that we drink that milk and eat those
apples. Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? Jones
would come back! Yes, Jones would come back! Surely, comrades," cried
Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his
tail, "surely there is no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?"

Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it
was that they did not want Jones back. When it was put to them in this
light, they had no more to say. The importance of keeping the pigs in good
health was all too obvious. So it was agreed without further argument that
the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.




Chapter IV



By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread
across half the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights
of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach them
the tune of 'Beasts of England'.

Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red
Lion at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the
monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by
a pack of good-for-nothing animals. The other farmers sympathised in
principle, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each of
them was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones's
misfortune to his own advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the two
farms which adjoined Animal Farm were on permanently bad terms. One of
them, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm,
much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedges
in a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going
gentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting
according to the season. The other farm, which was called Pinchfield, was
smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr. Frederick, a tough, shrewd
man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hard
bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for
them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.

Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on
Animal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning
too much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of
animals managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in a
fortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm
(they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the
name "Animal Farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and were
also rapidly starving to death. When time passed and the animals had
evidently not starved to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed their
tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished on
Animal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism,
tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in
common. This was what came of rebelling against the laws of Nature,
Frederick and Pilkington said.

However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful
farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed
their own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms,
and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through the
countryside. Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,
sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail
over, hunters refused their fences and shot their riders on to the other
side. Above all, the tune and even the words of 'Beasts of England' were
known everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The human beings
could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they
pretended to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, they
said, how even animals could bring themselves to sing such contemptible
rubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given a flogging on the spot.
And yet the song was irrepressible. The blackbirds whistled it in the
hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of the
smithies and the tune of the church bells. And when the human beings
listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of their
future doom.

Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was
already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and
alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones and
all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, had
entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to
the farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching
ahead with a gun in his hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the
recapture of the farm.

This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball,
who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar's campaigns which he had
found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gave
his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his
post.

As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his
first attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and
fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the
men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the
hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
However, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a
little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.
Snowball now launched his second line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all
the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded
and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with their
sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,
at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the
animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemies
in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what
Snowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, the
three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying
in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them
off. Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed
straight for Jones. Jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. The
pellets scored bloody streaks along Snowball's back, and a sheep dropped
dead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen stone
against Jones's legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun
flew out of his hands. But the most terrifying spectacle of all was Boxer,
rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod
hoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad from Foxwood
on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, several
men dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and the
next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the
yard. They were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not an
animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his own
fashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shoulders
and sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment
when the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the
yard and make a bolt for the main road. And so within five minutes of
their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same way as they
had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their
calves all the way.

All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with
his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn
him over. The boy did not stir.

"He is dead," said Boxer sorrowfully. "I had no intention of doing that.
I forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do
this on purpose?"

"No sentimentality, comrade!" cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood
was still dripping. "War is war. The only good human being is a dead one."

"I have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated Boxer, and
his eyes were full of tears.

"Where is Mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was
feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her
off with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with
her head buried among the hay in the manger. She had taken to flight as
soon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking for
her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had
already recovered and made off.

The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting
his own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptu
celebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and
'Beasts of England' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been
killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her
grave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the
need for all animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.

The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "Animal
Hero, First Class," which was conferred there and then on Snowball and
Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old
horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on
Sundays and holidays. There was also "Animal Hero, Second Class," which
was conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.

There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the
end, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the
ambush had been sprung. Mr. Jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,
and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse.
It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a
piece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on October the
twelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the Cowshed, and once on
Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.




Chapter V



As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late
for work every morning and excused herself by saying that she had
overslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite
was excellent. On every kind of pretext she would run away from work and
go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own
reflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something more
serious. One day, as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her
long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay, Clover took her aside.

"Mollie," she said, "I have something very serious to say to you. This
morning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from
Foxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington's men was standing on the other side of the
hedge. And--I was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this--he
was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. What
does that mean, Mollie?"

"He didn't! I wasn't! It isn't true!" cried Mollie, beginning to prance
about and paw the ground.

"Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that that
man was not stroking your nose?"

"It isn't true!" repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the
face, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the
field.

A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went
to Mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under
the straw was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon of
different colours.

Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of
her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the
other side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart
painted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fat
red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican,
was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly
clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to
be enjoying herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals ever
mentioned Mollie again.

In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and
nothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big
barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the
coming season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were
manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
This arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the
disputes between Snowball and Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point
where disagreement was possible. If one of them suggested sowing a bigger
acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of
oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right
for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything
except roots. Each had his own following, and there were some violent
debates. At the Meetings Snowball often won over the majority by his
brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support for
himself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Of
late the sheep had taken to bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad" both
in and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. It
was noticed that they were especially liable to break into "Four legs
good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in Snowball's speeches. Snowball
had made a close study of some back numbers of the 'Farmer and
Stockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans
for innovations and improvements. He talked learnedly about field drains,
silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all
the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot
every day, to save the labour of cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes of
his own, but said quietly that Snowball's would come to nothing, and
seemed to be biding his time. But of all their controversies, none was so
bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.

In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small
knoll which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground,
Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could
be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power.
This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a
circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking
machine. The animals had never heard of anything of this kind before
(for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive
machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured up
pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while
they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with
reading and conversation.

Within a few weeks Snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked
out. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which had
belonged to Mr. Jones--'One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House',
'Every Man His Own Bricklayer', and 'Electricity for Beginners'. Snowball
used as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a
smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there for
hours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of
chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly
to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of
excitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and
cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals
found completely unintelligible but very impressive. All of them came to
look at Snowball's drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and ducks
came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. Only Napoleon
held aloof. He had declared himself against the windmill from the start.
One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walked
heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and
snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating
them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg,
urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowball
did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone would
have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to
be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (How
these were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that
it could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much
labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days
a week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the
moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on
the windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves
into two factions under the slogan, "Vote for Snowball and the three-day
week" and "Vote for Napoleon and the full manger." Benjamin was the only
animal who did not side with either faction. He refused to believe either
that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save
work. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always
gone on--that is, badly.

Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. It was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another and
more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate Mr. Jones.
They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat
had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring
farms more restive than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in
disagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to
procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. According to
Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion
among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could
not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued
that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend
themselves. The animals listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, and
could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always found
themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

At last the day came when Snowball's plans were completed. At the Meeting
on the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on
the windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled in
the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by
bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building
of the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly
that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it,
and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and
seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowball
sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating
again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now
the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a
moment Snowball's eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences he
painted a picture of Animal Farm as it might be when sordid labour was
lifted from the animals' backs. His imagination had now run far beyond
chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate
threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders,
besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold
water, and an electric heater. By the time he had finished speaking, there
was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at this moment
Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball,
uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter
before.

At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs
wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed
straight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to
escape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and they
were after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals
crowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across
the long pasture that led to the road. He was running as only a pig can
run, but the dogs were close on his heels. Suddenly he slipped and it
seemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again, running faster
than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all but
closed his jaws on Snowball's tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in
time. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare,
slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a moment
the dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine
where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they
were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers and
reared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as
fierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that
they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been
used to do to Mr. Jones.

Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised
portion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver his
speech. He announced that from now on the Sunday-morning Meetings would
come to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In future
all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a
special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in
private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. The
animals would still assemble on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing
'Beasts of England', and receive their orders for the week; but there would
be no more debates.

In spite of the shock that Snowball's expulsion had given them, the
animals were dismayed by this announcement. Several of them would have
protested if they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer was
vaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,
and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think
of anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more
articulate. Four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of
disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking
at once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out deep,
menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then the
sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legs
bad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to any
chance of discussion.

Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement
to the others.

"Comrades," he said, "I trust that every animal here appreciates the
sacrifice that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon
himself. Do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! On the
contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes more
firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only
too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you
might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
Suppose you had decided to follow Snowball, with his moonshine of
windmills--Snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed," said somebody.

"Bravery is not enough," said Squealer. "Loyalty and obedience are more
important. And as to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will
come when we shall find that Snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.
Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword for today.
One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you do
not want Jones back?"

Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not
want Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "If Comrade
Napoleon says it, it must be right." And from then on he adopted the
maxim, "Napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "I
will work harder."

By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every
Sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to
receive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean of
flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the
foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the
animals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner before
entering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together as they had done
in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who
had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of
the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round
them, and the other pigs sitting behind. The rest of the animals sat
facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the orders for
the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'Beasts
of England', all the animals dispersed.

On the third Sunday after Snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhat
surprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built
after all. He did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but
merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work,
it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however,
had all been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of
pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. The building of
the windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take two
years.

That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that
Napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On the
contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan
which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually
been stolen from among Napoleon's papers. The windmill was, in fact,
Napoleon's own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so
strongly against it? Here Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, was
Comrade Napoleon's cunning. He had SEEMED to oppose the windmill, simply
as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous character and a
bad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could go
forward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was something
called tactics. He repeated a number of times, "Tactics, comrades,
tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. The
animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke so
persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so
threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further
questions.




Chapter VI



All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in their
work; they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that
they did was for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind who
would come after them, and not for a pack of idle, thieving human beings.

Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in
August Napoleon announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons
as well. This work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absented
himself from it would have his rations reduced by half. Even so, it was
found necessary to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a little
less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should
have been sown with roots in the early summer were not sown because the
ploughing had not been completed early enough. It was possible to foresee
that the coming winter would be a hard one.

The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry of
limestone on the farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one
of the outhouses, so that all the materials for building were at hand. But
the problem the animals could not at first solve was how to break up the
stone into pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing this
except with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no
animal could stand on his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort did
the right idea occur to somebody-namely, to utilise the force of gravity.
Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying all over
the bed of the quarry. The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all
together, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the
rope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they dragged
them with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, where
they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. Transporting
the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. The horses
carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel
and Benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their
share. By late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and
then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day of
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. Nothing
could have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength seemed equal to
that of all the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder began
to slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged
down the hill, it was always Boxer who strained himself against the rope
and brought the boulder to a stop. To see him toiling up the slope inch by
inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground,
and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.
Clover warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but
Boxer would never listen to her. His two slogans, "I will work harder"
and "Napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to all
problems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him
three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.
And in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would
go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down
to the site of the windmill unassisted.

The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the
hardness of their work. If they had no more food than they had had in
Jones's day, at least they did not have less. The advantage of only having
to feed themselves, and not having to support five extravagant human
beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to
outweigh it. And in many ways the animal method of doing things was more
efficient and saved labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be
done with a thoroughness impossible to human beings. And again, since no
animal now stole, it was unnecessary to fence off pasture from arable
land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and gates.
Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began to
make them selves felt. There was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dog
biscuits, and iron for the horses' shoes, none of which could be produced
on the farm. Later there would also be need for seeds and artificial
manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the
windmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.

One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders,
Napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now onwards
Animal Farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, of
course, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain certain
materials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the windmill must
override everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements to
sell a stack of hay and part of the current year's wheat crop, and later
on, if more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of
eggs, for which there was always a market in Willingdon. The hens, said
Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution
towards the building of the windmill.

Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to have
any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make
use of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at
that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was expelled? All the animals
remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they
remembered it. The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon
abolished the Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly
silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheep
broke into "Four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness
was smoothed over. Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for silence and
announced that he had already made all the arrangements. There would be no
need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which
would clearly be most undesirable. He intended to take the whole burden
upon his own shoulders. A Mr. Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon,
had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal Farm and the outside
world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his
instructions. Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "Long live
Animal Farm!" and after the singing of 'Beasts of England' the animals
were dismissed.

Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds at
rest. He assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and
using money had never been passed, or even suggested. It was pure
imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by
Snowball. A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked
them shrewdly, "Are you certain that this is not something that you have
dreamed, comrades? Have you any record of such a resolution? Is it written
down anywhere?" And since it was certainly true that nothing of the kind
existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was a
sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way
of business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone else
that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be
worth having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind of
dread, and avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight of
Napoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on two
legs, roused their pride and partly reconciled them to the new
arrangement. Their relations with the human race were now not quite the
same as they had been before. The human beings did not hate Animal Farm
any less now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever.
Every human being held it as an article of faith that the farm would go
bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the windmill would be a
failure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another by
means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it
did stand up, then that it would never work. And yet, against their will,
they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the
animals were managing their own affairs. One symptom of this was that they
had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championship
of Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. Except through Whymper, there was as yet no
contact between Animal Farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of
Pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took up their residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that a
resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again
Squealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. It was
absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the
farm, should have a quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to the
dignity of the Leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon
under the title of "Leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty.
Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room
as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed it off as
usual with "Napoleon is always right!", but Clover, who thought she
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and
tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there.
Finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched
Muriel.

"Muriel," she said, "read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not say
something about never sleeping in a bed?"

With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out.

"It says, 'No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announced
finally.

Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandment
mentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.
And Squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by two
or three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in its proper perspective.

"You have heard then, comrades," he said, "that we pigs now sleep in the
beds of the farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, that
there was ever a ruling against beds? A bed merely means a place to sleep
in. A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. The rule was
against sheets, which are a human invention. We have removed the sheets
from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. And very comfortable
beds they are too! But not more comfortable than we need, I can tell you,
comrades, with all the brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not rob
us of our repose, would you, comrades? You would not have us too tired to
carry out our duties? Surely none of you wishes to see Jones back?"

The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said
about the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some days
afterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up an
hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was made
about that either.

By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year,
and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the
winter were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated for
everything. It was almost half built now. After the harvest there was a
stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever,
thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of
stone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. Boxer would
even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by the
light of the harvest moon. In their spare moments the animals would walk
round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and
perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever have
been able to build anything so imposing. Only old Benjamin refused to grow
enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothing
beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.

November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop because
it was now too wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when the
gale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundations
and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn. The hens woke up
squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of
hearing a gun go off in the distance. In the morning the animals came out
of their stalls to find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm
tree at the foot of the orchard had been plucked up like a radish. They
had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from every animal's
throat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The windmill was in ruins.

With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom moved
out of a walk, raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit of
all their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they had
broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around. Unable at first to
speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleon
paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tail
had grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of
intense mental activity. Suddenly he halted as though his mind were
made up.

"Comrades," he said quietly, "do you know who is responsible for this? Do
you know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?
SNOWBALL!" he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. "Snowball has done
this thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avenge
himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here under
cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, here
and now I pronounce the death sentence upon Snowball. 'Animal Hero, Second
Class,' and half a bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to
justice. A full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"

The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball could
be guilty of such an action. There was a cry of indignation, and everyone
began thinking out ways of catching Snowball if he should ever come back.
Almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at
a little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for a few
yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffed
deeply at them and pronounced them to be Snowball's. He gave it as his
opinion that Snowball had probably come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.

"No more delays, comrades!" cried Napoleon when the footprints had been
examined. "There is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuilding
the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. We
will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily.
Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall
be carried out to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Long
live Animal Farm!"




Chapter VII



It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow,
and then by a hard frost which did not break till well into February. The
animals carried on as best they could with the rebuilding of the windmill,
well knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envious
human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finished
on time.

Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was
Snowball who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen down
because the walls were too thin. The animals knew that this was not the
case. Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick this
time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much
larger quantities of stone. For a long time the quarry was full of
snowdrifts and nothing could be done. Some progress was made in the dry
frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals could
not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. They were always
cold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart.
Squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of
labour, but the other animals found more inspiration in Boxer's strength
and his never-failing cry of "I will work harder!"

In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, and
it was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make up
for it. Then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crop
had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered thickly enough.
The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible.
For days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels.
Starvation seemed to stare them in the face.

It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world.
Emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were
inventing fresh lies about Animal Farm. Once again it was being put about
that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were
continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and
infanticide. Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow
if the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to make
use of Mr. Whymper to spread a contrary impression. Hitherto the animals
had had little or no contact with Whymper on his weekly visits: now,
however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark
casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. In addition,
Napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled
nearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered up with what remained
of the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext Whymper was led through
the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. He was
deceived, and continued to report to the outside world that there was no
food shortage on Animal Farm.

Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it would
be necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. In these days
Napoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in the
farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. When he
did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who
closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently he
did not even appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one
of the other pigs, usually Squealer.

One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in
to lay again, must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, through
Whymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. The price of these would
pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on
and conditions were easier.

When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had been
warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not
believed that it would really happen. They were just getting their
clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the
eggs away now was murder. For the first time since the expulsion of Jones,
there was something resembling a rebellion. Led by three young Black
Minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart Napoleon's
wishes. Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their
eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. Napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. He ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that
any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished
by death. The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. For five
days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their
nesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies were
buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of
coccidiosis. Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly
delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them
away.

All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield.
Napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both
Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. It was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
Frederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.

Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowball
was secretly frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbed
that they could hardly sleep in their stalls. Every night, it was said, he
came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of
mischief. He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs,
he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Whenever
anything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If a
window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to say
that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the
store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrown
it down the well. Curiously enough, they went on believing this even after
the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. The cows declared
unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their
sleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to
be in league with Snowball.

Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball's
activities. With his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour
of inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a
respectful distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and snuffed the
ground for traces of Snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detect
by the smell. He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed,
in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball
almost everywhere. He would put his snout to the ground, give several deep
sniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, "Snowball! He has been here! I can
smell him distinctly!" and at the word "Snowball" all the dogs let out
blood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth.

The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as though
Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about
them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. In the evening Squealer
called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told
them that he had some serious news to report.

"Comrades!" cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible
thing has been discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of
Pinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm
away from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. But
there is worse than that. We had thought that Snowball's rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. But we were wrong, comrades. Do
you know what the real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones from
the very start! He was Jones's secret agent all the time. It has all been
proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just
discovered. To my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. Did we not
see for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get us
defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?"

The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball's
destruction of the windmill. But it was some minutes before they could
fully take it in. They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how
they had seen Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of the
Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he
had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones's gun had
wounded his back. At first it was a little difficult to see how this
fitted in with his being on Jones's side. Even Boxer, who seldom asked
questions, was puzzled. He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,
shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"I do not believe that," he said. "Snowball fought bravely at the Battle
of the Cowshed. I saw him myself. Did we not give him 'Animal Hero, first
Class,' immediately afterwards?"

"That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now--it is all written down in
the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying to
lure us to our doom."

"But he was wounded," said Boxer. "We all saw him running with blood."

"That was part of the arrangement!" cried Squealer. "Jones's shot only
grazed him. I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to
read it. The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very nearly
succeeded--I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how,
just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard,
Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? And do
you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'Death to Humanity!' and sank his teeth in Jones's leg? Surely you
remember THAT, comrades?" exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.

Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did remember it. At any rate, they remembered that at
the critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee. But Boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "What he has done since is different. But I believe that at the
Battle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade."

"Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," announced Squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
Snowball was Jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the Rebellion was ever thought of."

"Ah, that is different!" said Boxer. "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"That is the true spirit, comrade!" cried Squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turned
to go, then paused and added impressively: "I warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. For we have reason to think that
some of Snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"

Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animals
to assemble in the yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleon
emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently
awarded himself "Animal Hero, First Class", and "Animal Hero, Second
Class"), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls
that sent shivers down all the animals' spines. They all cowered silently
in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was
about to happen.

Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a
high-pitched whimper. Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of
the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to
Napoleon's feet. The pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood,
and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement of
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw them
coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned
him to the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with
their tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether
he should crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to change
countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer
lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, with
guilt written on every line of their countenances. Napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. They were the same four pigs as had
protested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings. Without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick. They added that Snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been Jones's secret agent for
years past. When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon's orders. They, too,
were slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and confessed to having
secreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them in
the night. Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking
pool--urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball--and two other sheep
confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of
Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering
from a cough. They were all slain on the spot. And so the tale of
confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses
lying before Napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.

When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs,
crept away in a body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not know
which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued
themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. Since Jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. Not even a rat had been
killed. They had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer remained on
his feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally he
said:

"I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. It must be due to some fault in ourselves. The
solution, as I see it, is to work harder. From now onwards I shall get up
a full hour earlier in the mornings."

And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having got
there, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to
the windmill before retiring for the night.

The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they were
lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of Animal
Farm was within their view--the long pasture stretching down to the main
road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields
where the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm
buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear spring
evening. The grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays
of the sun. Never had the farm--and with a kind of surprise they
remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own
property--appeared to the animals so desirable a place. As Clover looked
down the hillside her eyes filled with tears. If she could have spoken her
thoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimed
at when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of the
human race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had
looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them to
rebellion. If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had been
of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each
working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she
had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of
Major's speech. Instead--she did not know why--they had come to a time
when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed
everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after
confessing to shocking crimes. There was no thought of rebellion or
disobedience in her mind. She knew that, even as things were, they were
far better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that before
all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.
Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the
orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon. But
still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped
and toiled. It was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced
the bullets of Jones's gun. Such were her thoughts, though she lacked the
words to express them.

At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was
unable to find, she began to sing 'Beasts of England'. The other animals
sitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--very
tunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung it
before.

They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer,
attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something
important to say. He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade
Napoleon, 'Beasts of England' had been abolished. From now onwards it was
forbidden to sing it.

The animals were taken aback.

"Why?" cried Muriel.

"It's no longer needed, comrade," said Squealer stiffly. "'Beasts of
England' was the song of the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is now
completed. The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.
The enemy both external and internal has been defeated. In 'Beasts of
England' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.
But that society has now been established. Clearly this song has no longer
any purpose."

Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have
protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of
"Four legs good, two legs bad," which went on for several minutes and put
an end to the discussion.

So 'Beasts of England' was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet,
had composed another song which began:


Animal Farm, Animal Farm,
Never through me shalt thou come to harm!


and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag.
But somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to
come up to 'Beasts of England'.




Chapter VIII



A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down,
some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the Sixth
Commandment decreed "No animal shall kill any other animal." And though no
one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was
felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.
Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when
Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she
fetched Muriel. Muriel read the Commandment for her. It ran: "No animal
shall kill any other animal WITHOUT CAUSE." Somehow or other, the last two
words had slipped out of the animals' memory. But they saw now that the
Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.

Throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in
the previous year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as
before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular
work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. There were times when it seemed
to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they
had done in Jones's day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long
strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures
proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by
two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent,
as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,
especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions
had been like before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days when
they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.

All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs.
Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight.
When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by
a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of
trumpeter, letting out a loud "cock-a-doodle-doo" before Napoleon spoke.
Even in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments
from the others. He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him,
and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in the
glass cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also announced that the gun
would be fired every year on Napoleon's birthday, as well as on the other
two anniversaries.

Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as "Napoleon." He was always
referred to in formal style as "our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," and this
pigs liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terror
of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings' Friend, and the like.
In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his
cheeks of Napoleon's wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love
he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals
who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms. It had become
usual to give Napoleon the credit for every successful achievement and
every stroke of good fortune. You would often hear one hen remark to
another, "Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid
five eggs in six days"; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would
exclaim, "Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this
water tastes!" The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a
poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and which
ran as follows:


Friend of fatherless!
Fountain of happiness!
Lord of the swill-bucket! Oh, how my soul is on
Fire when I gaze at thy
Calm and commanding eye,
Like the sun in the sky,
Comrade Napoleon!

Thou are the giver of
All that thy creatures love,
Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;
Every beast great or small
Sleeps at peace in his stall,
Thou watchest over all,
Comrade Napoleon!

Had I a sucking-pig,
Ere he had grown as big
Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
He should have learned to be
Faithful and true to thee,
Yes, his first squeak should be
"Comrade Napoleon!"


Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall
of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It was
surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in
white paint.

Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timber
was still unsold. Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. At the same time there
were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack
Animal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. Snowball was known to be still skulking on
Pinchfield Farm. In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to
hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by
Snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon. They were
executed immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon's safety were
taken. Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young
pig named Pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate
it, lest it should be poisoned.

At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell
the pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a
regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm
and Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they
were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly. The animals
distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to
Frederick, whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and the
windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack
grew stronger and stronger. Frederick, it was said, intended to bring
against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the
magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the
title-deeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terrible
stories were leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that
Frederick practised upon his animals. He had flogged an old horse to
death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the
furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with
splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. The animals' blood boiled
with rage when they heard of these things being done to their comrades,
and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack
Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. But
Squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade
Napoleon's strategy.

Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sunday
morning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at
any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he
considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with
scoundrels of that description. The pigeons who were still sent out to
spread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on
Foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "Death to
Humanity" in favour of "Death to Frederick." In the late summer yet
another of Snowball's machinations was laid bare. The wheat crop was full
of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits
Snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. A gander who had been
privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately
committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries. The animals
now also learned that Snowball had never--as many of them had believed
hitherto--received the order of "Animal Hero, First Class." This was
merely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of the
Cowshed by Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he had been
censured for showing cowardice in the battle. Once again some of the
animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able
to convince them that their memories had been at fault.

In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had to
be gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. The
machinery had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the
purchase of it, but the structure was completed. In the teeth of every
difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck
and of Snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the
very day! Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their
masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it
had been built the first time. Moreover, the walls were twice as thick as
before. Nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! And when
they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had
overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives
when the sails were turning and the dynamos running--when they thought of
all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round
the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. Napoleon himself, attended by his
dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he
personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced
that the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.

Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in
the barn. They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that
he had sold the pile of timber to Frederick. Tomorrow Frederick's wagons
would arrive and begin carting it away. Throughout the whole period of his
seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secret
agreement with Frederick.

All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had
been sent to Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield
Farm and to alter their slogan from "Death to Frederick" to "Death to
Pilkington." At the same time Napoleon assured the animals that the
stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about Frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been
greatly exaggerated. All these rumours had probably originated with
Snowball and his agents. It now appeared that Snowball was not, after all,
hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:
he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at Foxwood, and had
in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.

The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon's cunning. By seeming to be
friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by
twelve pounds. But the superior quality of Napoleon's mind, said Squealer,
was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick.
Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,
which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon
it. But Napoleon was too clever for him. He had demanded payment in real
five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was
removed. Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just
enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was all
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect Frederick's bank-notes. Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. The next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from Napoleon's apartments. The news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. The banknotes were forgeries! Frederick
had got the timber for nothing!

Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice
pronounced the death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said,
Frederick should be boiled alive. At the same time he warned them that
after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. Frederick and
his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinels
were placed at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeons
were sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might
re-establish good relations with Pilkington.

The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast when
the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his
followers had already come through the five-barred gate. Boldly enough the
animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the
easy victory that they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There were
fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as
soon as they got within fifty yards. The animals could not face the
terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts
of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. A number
of them were already wounded. They took refuge in the farm buildings and
peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. The whole of the big
pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. For the
moment even Napoleon seemed at a loss. He paced up and down without a
word, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were sent in the
direction of Foxwood. If Pilkington and his men would help them, the day
might yet be won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent
out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from
Pilkington. On it was pencilled the words: "Serves you right."

Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The animals
watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men had
produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. They were going to knock the
windmill down.

"Impossible!" cried Napoleon. "We have built the walls far too thick for
that. They could not knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!"

But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two with
the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the
windmill. Slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded his
long muzzle.

"I thought so," he said. "Do you not see what they are doing? In another
moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."

Terrified, the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of the
shelter of the buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to be
running in all directions. Then there was a deafening roar. The pigeons
swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung
themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. When they got up
again, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had
been. Slowly the breeze drifted it away. The windmill had ceased to exist!

At this sight the animals' courage returned to them. The fear and despair
they had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this
vile, contemptible act. A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without
waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body and made straight
for the enemy. This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept
over them like hail. It was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired again
and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with
their sticks and their heavy boots. A cow, three sheep, and two geese were
killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. Even Napoleon, who was directing
operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. But
the men did not go unscathed either. Three of them had their heads broken
by blows from Boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell. And
when the nine dogs of Napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They saw that they were in
danger of being surrounded. Frederick shouted to his men to get out while
the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for
dear life. The animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field,
and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the
thorn hedge.

They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limp
back towards the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the
grass moved some of them to tears. And for a little while they halted in
sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood. Yes, it
was gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even the
foundations were partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could not
this time, as before, make use of the fallen stones. This time the stones
had vanished too. The force of the explosion had flung them to distances
of hundreds of yards. It was as though the windmill had never been.

As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent
during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and
beaming with satisfaction. And the animals heard, from the direction of
the farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.

"What is that gun firing for?" said Boxer.

"To celebrate our victory!" cried Squealer.

"What victory?" said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe
and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind
leg.

"What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil--the
sacred soil of Animal Farm?"

"But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for two
years!"

"What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmills
if we feel like it. You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that
we have done. The enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we
stand upon. And now--thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon--we have
won every inch of it back again!"

"Then we have won back what we had before," said Boxer.

"That is our victory," said Squealer.

They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer's leg
smarted painfully. He saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the
windmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced
himself for the task. But for the first time it occurred to him that he
was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite
what they had once been.

But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing
again--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that Napoleon
made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all
that they had won a great victory. The animals slain in the battle were
given a solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as
a hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Two
whole days were given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches,
and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on
every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for
each dog. It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of
the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order
of the Green Banner, which he had conferred upon himself. In the general
rejoicings the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.

It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky
in the cellars of the farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time when
the house was first occupied. That night there came from the farmhouse the
sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of
'Beasts of England' were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon,
wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones's, was distinctly seen to emerge
from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors
again. But in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. Not a
pig appeared to be stirring. It was nearly nine o'clock when Squealer made
his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail
hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously
ill. He called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible
piece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was dying!

A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of the
farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes they
asked one another what they should do if their Leader were taken away from
them. A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived to
introduce poison into Napoleon's food. At eleven o'clock Squealer came
out to make another announcement. As his last act upon earth, Comrade
Napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be
punished by death.

By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the
following morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the
way to recovery. By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and
on the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase
in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. A week later
Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it
had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals
who were past work, was to be ploughed up. It was given out that the
pasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that
Napoleon intended to sow it with barley.

About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was
able to understand. One night at about twelve o'clock there was a loud
crash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. It was a
moonlit night. At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the
Seven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand
there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.
The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him back to
the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. None of the animals could
form any idea as to what this meant, except old Benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had
remembered wrong. They had thought the Fifth Commandment was "No animal
shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.
Actually the Commandment read: "No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS."




Chapter IX



Boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started the
rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were
ended. Boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of
honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. In the evenings he would
admit privately to Clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clover
treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing
them, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard. "A horse's
lungs do not last for ever," she said to him. But Boxer would not listen.
He had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill well
under way before he reached the age for retirement.

At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated,
the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at
fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at
five. Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. As yet no animal had
actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussed
more and more. Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set
aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was
to be fenced off and turned into a grazing-ground for superannuated
animals. For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds of
corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or
possibly an apple on public holidays. Boxer's twelfth birthday was due in
the late summer of the following year.

Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been,
and food was even shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, except
those of the pigs and the dogs. A too rigid equality in rations, Squealer
explained, would have been contrary to the principles of Animalism. In any
case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were
NOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. For the
time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment
of rations (Squealer always spoke of it as a "readjustment," never as a
"reduction"), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvement
was enormous. Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved
to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than
they had had in Jones's day, that they worked shorter hours, that their
drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a
larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had
more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animals
believed every word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had
almost faded out of their memories. They knew that life nowadays was harsh
and bare, that they were often hungry and often cold, and that they were
usually working when they were not asleep. But doubtless it had been worse
in the old days. They were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days they
had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference,
as Squealer did not fail to point out.

There were many more mouths to feed now. In the autumn the four sows had
all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between
them. The young pigs were piebald, and as Napoleon was the only boar on
the farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. It was announced
that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would
be built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs were
given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. They
took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with
the other young animals. About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule
that when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animal
must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have
the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.

The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money.
There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased,
and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery
for the windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house,
sugar for Napoleon's own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the
ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as
tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump of
hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs
was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely
hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. Rations,
reduced in December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in the
stalls were forbidden to save oil. But the pigs seemed comfortable enough,
and in fact were putting on weight if anything. One afternoon in late
February a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never
smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house,
which had been disused in Jones's time, and which stood beyond the
kitchen. Someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. The animals
sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being
prepared for their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the following
Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved
for the pigs. The field beyond the orchard had already been sown with
barley. And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a
ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself,
which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.

But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the
fact that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before.
There were more songs, more speeches, more processions. Napoleon had
commanded that once a week there should be held something called a
Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the
struggles and triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animals
would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in
military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows,
then the sheep, and then the poultry. The dogs flanked the procession and
at the head of all marched Napoleon's black cockerel. Boxer and Clover
always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the
horn and the caption, "Long live Comrade Napoleon!" Afterwards there were
recitations of poems composed in Napoleon's honour, and a speech by
Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of
foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. The sheep were
the greatest devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone
complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near)
that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the
sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of "Four legs
good, two legs bad!" But by and large the animals enjoyed these
celebrations. They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all,
they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for their
own benefit. So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer's
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their
bellies were empty, at least part of the time.

In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary
to elect a President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was
elected unanimously. On the same day it was given out that fresh documents
had been discovered which revealed further details about Snowball's
complicity with Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of
the Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
Jones's side. In fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "Long live
Humanity!" on his lips. The wounds on Snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon's
teeth.

In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the
farm, after an absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still did
no work, and talked in the same strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain.
He would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to
anyone who would listen. "Up there, comrades," he would say solemnly,
pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other side
of that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain,
that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from our
labours!" He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights,
and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and
lump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of the animals believed him. Their
lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and
just that a better world should exist somewhere else? A thing that was
difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses. They
all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountain
were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working,
with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.

After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, all
the animals worked like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work of
the farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse
for the young pigs, which was started in March. Sometimes the long hours
on insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. In
nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not
what it had been. It was only his appearance that was a little altered;
his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunches
seemed to have shrunken. The others said, "Boxer will pick up when the
spring grass comes on"; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter.
Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced
his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that
nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. At such times
his lips were seen to form the words, "I will work harder"; he had no
voice left. Once again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of his
health, but Boxer paid no attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching.
He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was
accumulated before he went on pension.

Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that
something had happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load of
stone down to the windmill. And sure enough, the rumour was true. A few
minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "Boxer has fallen!
He is lying on his side and can't get up!"

About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the
windmill stood. There lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck
stretched out, unable even to raise his head. His eyes were glazed, his
sides matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of his
mouth. Clover dropped to her knees at his side.

"Boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"

"It is my lung," said Boxer in a weak voice. "It does not matter. I think
you will be able to finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty good
store of stone accumulated. I had only another month to go in any case.
To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement. And
perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the
same time and be a companion to me."

"We must get help at once," said Clover. "Run, somebody, and tell Squealer
what has happened."

All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give
Squealer the news. Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down at
Boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated
in the hospital at Willingdon. The animals felt a little uneasy at this.
Except for Mollie and Snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. However, Squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in Willingdon could treat Boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. And about half an hour later, when Boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good
bed of straw for him.

For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out a
large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest
in the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after
meals. In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while
Benjamin kept the flies off him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for what
had happened. If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another
three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would
spend in the corner of the big pasture. It would be the first time that he
had had leisure to study and improve his mind. He intended, he said, to
devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters
of the alphabet.

However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours,
and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.
The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a
pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the
direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It was
the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited--indeed, it was
the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "Quick, quick!" he
shouted. "Come at once! They're taking Boxer away!" Without waiting for
orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm
buildings. Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by
two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a
low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. And Boxer's stall was
empty.

The animals crowded round the van. "Good-bye, Boxer!" they chorused,
"good-bye!"

"Fools! Fools!" shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the
earth with his small hoofs. "Fools! Do you not see what is written on the
side of that van?"

That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spell
out the words. But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly
silence he read:

"'Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealer
in Hides and Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied.' Do you not understand what that
means? They are taking Boxer to the knacker's!"

A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on the
box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart
trot. All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices.
Clover forced her way to the front. The van began to gather speed. Clover
tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. "Boxer!"
she cried. "Boxer! Boxer! Boxer!" And just at this moment, as though he
had heard the uproar outside, Boxer's face, with the white stripe down his
nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.

"Boxer!" cried Clover in a terrible voice. "Boxer! Get out! Get out
quickly! They're taking you to your death!"

All the animals took up the cry of "Get out, Boxer, get out!" But the van
was already gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertain
whether Boxer had understood what Clover had said. But a moment later his
face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous
drumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to kick his way out. The
time had been when a few kicks from Boxer's hoofs would have smashed the
van to matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a few
moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. In
desperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the
van to stop. "Comrades, comrades!" they shouted. "Don't take your own
brother to his death!" But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise
what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace.
Boxer's face did not reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought of
racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the
van was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road. Boxer was never
seen again.

Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at
Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.
Squealer came to announce the news to the others. He had, he said, been
present during Boxer's last hours.

"It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!" said Squealer, lifting
his trotter and wiping away a tear. "I was at his bedside at the very
last. And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear
that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was
finished. 'Forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'Forward in the name of the
Rebellion. Long live Animal Farm! Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon is
always right.' Those were his very last words, comrades."

Here Squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment,
and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he
proceeded.

It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour
had been circulated at the time of Boxer's removal. Some of the animals
had noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked "Horse
Slaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was
being sent to the knacker's. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer,
that any animal could be so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking
his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved
Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that? But the explanation was really
very simple. The van had previously been the property of the knacker, and
had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old
name out. That was how the mistake had arisen.

The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer went
on to give further graphic details of Boxer's death-bed, the admirable
care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon had
paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and
the sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by the
thought that at least he had died happy.

Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morning
and pronounced a short oration in Boxer's honour. It had not been
possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains for
interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from
the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer's
grave. And in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorial
banquet in Boxer's honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of
Boxer's two favourite maxims, "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleon
is always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to
adopt as his own.

On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up from
Willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That night
there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




Chapter X



Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
A time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
Rebellion, except Clover, Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. Napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. Squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only old
Benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about
the muzzle, and, since Boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had been
born to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of
mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a
thing before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now besides
Clover. They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good
comrades, but very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabet
beyond the letter B. They accepted everything that they were told about
the Rebellion and the principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, for
whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they
understood very much of it.

The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been
enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington. The
windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a
threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings
had been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The windmill,
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. It
was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. The
animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was
finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. But the luxuries
of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with
electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no
longer talked about. Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the
spirit of Animalism. The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard
and living frugally.

Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the
animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the
dogs. Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many
dogs. It was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion.
There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the
supervision and organisation of the farm. Much of this work was of a kind
that the other animals were too ignorant to understand. For example,
Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every day
upon mysterious things called "files," "reports," "minutes," and
"memoranda". These were large sheets of paper which had to be closely
covered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burnt
in the furnace. This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the
farm, Squealer said. But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by
their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites
were always good.

As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always
been. They were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the
pool, they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by the
cold, and in summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones among them
racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early
days of the Rebellion, when Jones's expulsion was still recent, things had
been better or worse than now. They could not remember. There was nothing
with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go
upon except Squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated
that everything was getting better and better. The animals found the
problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on
such things now. Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail of
his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be
much better or much worse--hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so
he said, the unalterable law of life.

And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for an
instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal
Farm. They were still the only farm in the whole county--in all
England!--owned and operated by animals. Not one of them, not even the
youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or
twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard the
gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their
hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards
the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the Seven
Commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been
defeated. None of the old dreams had been abandoned. The Republic of the
Animals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should
be untrodden by human feet, was still believed in. Some day it was coming:
it might not be soon, it might not be with in the lifetime of any animal
now living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of 'Beasts of England'
was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact
that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to
sing it aloud. It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of
their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not
as other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical
human beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves.
No creature among them went upon two legs. No creature called any other
creature "Master." All animals were equal.

One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led
them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which
had become overgrown with birch saplings. The sheep spent the whole day
there browsing at the leaves under Squealer's supervision. In the evening
he returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told
the sheep to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for a
whole week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them.
Squealer was with them for the greater part of every day. He was, he said,
teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.

It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the
animals had finished work and were making their way back to the farm
buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard.
Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks. It was Clover's voice. She
neighed again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the
yard. Then they saw what Clover had seen.

It was a pig walking on his hind legs.

Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to
supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect
balance, he was strolling across the yard. And a moment later, out from
the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their
hind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle
unsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of a
stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard
successfully. And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a
shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself,
majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with
his dogs gambolling round him.

He carried a whip in his trotter.

There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the
animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was
as though the world had turned upside-down. Then there came a moment when
the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of
their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years,
of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened--they
might have uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, as
though at a signal, all the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of--

"Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four
legs good, two legs BETTER!"

It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep
had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs
had marched back into the farmhouse.

Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was
Clover. Her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she
tugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn,
where the Seven Commandments were written. For a minute or two they stood
gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.

"My sight is failing," she said finally. "Even when I was young I could
not have read what was written there. But it appears to me that that wall
looks different. Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be,
Benjamin?"

For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what
was written on the wall. There was nothing there now except a single
Commandment. It ran:

ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS

After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. It
did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a
wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subscriptions to 'John Bull', 'Tit-Bits', and the 'Daily Mirror'. It did
not seem strange when Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden
with a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones's
clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearing
in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his
favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been
used to wearing on Sundays.

A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm.
A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of
inspection. They were shown all over the farm, and expressed great
admiration for everything they saw, especially the windmill. The animals
were weeding the turnip field. They worked diligently hardly raising their
faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of
the pigs or of the human visitors.

That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse.
And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were
stricken with curiosity. What could be happening in there, now that for
the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality?
With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the
farmhouse garden.

At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way
in. They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough
peered in at the dining-room window. There, round the long table, sat half
a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon
himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigs
appeared completely at ease in their chairs. The company had been enjoying
a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to
drink a toast. A large jug was circulating, and the mugs were being
refilled with beer. No one noticed the wondering faces of the animals that
gazed in at the window.

Mr. Pilkington, of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In a
moment, he said, he would ask the present company to drink a toast. But
before doing so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon him
to say.

It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said--and, he was sure,
to all others present--to feel that a long period of mistrust and
misunderstanding had now come to an end. There had been a time--not that
he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments--but there
had been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been
regarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain
measure of misgiving, by their human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents had
occurred, mistaken ideas had been current. It had been felt that the
existence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal and
was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood. Too many
farmers had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of
licence and indiscipline would prevail. They had been nervous about the
effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employees. But
all such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends had visited
Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what
did they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and
an orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere. He
believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farm
did more work and received less food than any animals in the county.
Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features which
they intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.

He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly
feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its
neighbours. Between pigs and human beings there was not, and there need
not be, any clash of interests whatever. Their struggles and their
difficulties were one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere?
Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some
carefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too
overcome by amusement to be able to utter it. After much choking, during
which his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: "If you
have your lower animals to contend with," he said, "we have our lower
classes!" This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once
again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours,
and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.

And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet
and make certain that their glasses were full. "Gentlemen," concluded
Mr. Pilkington, "gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity of
Animal Farm!"

There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was so
gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his
mug against Mr. Pilkington's before emptying it. When the cheering had
died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too
had a few words to say.

Like all of Napoleon's speeches, it was short and to the point. He too,
he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. For
a long time there had been rumours--circulated, he had reason to think,
by some malignant enemy--that there was something subversive and even
revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had been
credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on
neighbouring farms. Nothing could be further from the truth! Their sole
wish, now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal business
relations with their neighbours. This farm which he had the honour to
control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, which
were in his own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.

He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still
lingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the
farm which should have the effect of promoting confidence still further.
Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of
addressing one another as "Comrade." This was to be suppressed. There had
also been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching
every Sunday morning past a boar's skull which was nailed to a post in the
garden. This, too, would be suppressed, and the skull had already been
buried. His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew
from the masthead. If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white
hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been
removed. It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.

He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr. Pilkington's excellent
and neighbourly speech. Mr. Pilkington had referred throughout to
"Animal Farm." He could not of course know--for he, Napoleon, was only
now for the first time announcing it--that the name "Animal Farm"
had been abolished. Henceforward the farm was to be known as "The Manor
Farm"--which, he believed, was its correct and original name.

"Gentlemen," concluded Napoleon, "I will give you the same toast as
before, but in a different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen,
here is my toast: To the prosperity of The Manor Farm!"

There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to
the dregs. But as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed to
them that some strange thing was happening. What was it that had altered
in the faces of the pigs? Clover's old dim eyes flitted from one face to
another. Some of them had five chins, some had four, some had three. But
what was it that seemed to be melting and changing? Then, the applause
having come to an end, the company took up their cards and continued the
game that had been interrupted, and the animals crept silently away.

But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar of
voices was coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked through
the window again. Yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. There were
shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furious
denials. The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon and
Mr. Pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.

Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question,
now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outside
looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again;
but already it was impossible to say which was which.


November 1943-February 1944



THE END

The Smallest Dragonboy

by Anne McCaffrey

When the marvelous Anne McCaffrey died at the age of 85 in 2011, she left a huge hole in the science fiction field. Fortunately, she gave us hundreds of novels, essays, and short stories to help fill some of that hole, although new readers will never get the chance to see her in person, which was always a treat.

Anne McCaffrey is one of science fiction's most popular authors. After her novel, The White Dragon, (1978) became one of the first science fiction novels to ever hit The New York Times bestseller list, Anne's work remained a staple of bestseller lists for decades.

Most non-readers of McCaffrey associate her with the Dragonriders of Pern series and, because the series has "dragon" in the title, erroneously believe the series is fantasy. Instead, it examines human history on a planet called Pern. Science fiction tropes abound--a planet with an odd orbit, spaceships, telepathy, lost (but useful) technology, as well as the existence of the Other on two levels--the dragons themselves and the dragonriders, who bond with those dragons.

If Pern were the only thing Anne McCaffrey ever wrote, it would cement her place in science fiction forever. But it's not. She also wrote the Brain & Brawn Ship series, which features such classic tales as The Ship Who Sang, the Catteni series, the Talents universe, and more series than I can name in this brief introduction.

McCaffrey's importance to the field cannot be understated. She is the first woman to win a Hugo for fiction. (The first woman to win a Hugo period was Elinor Busby who, along with F. M. Busby, Burnett Toskey, and Wally Weber, won the Best Fanzine award in 1960.) McCaffrey was also the first woman to win the Nebula Award, winning it in the fourth year the award was given out.

Her awards are too numerous to list here, but they include the Science Fiction Writers of America Grand Master award, several lifetime achievement awards, and the Golden Pen award, which is given by children to their favorite author.

With such a vast array of excellent fiction to choose from, I found it hard to pick the best story for this volume. McCaffrey excels at the novella length, and my favorites of hers are the longer pieces. Because of my word-length constraints for this volume, I spent a lot of happy hours reading her shorter stories.

And then I came across "The Smallest Dragonboy," which I had not read before. It does everything I wanted in the perfect McCaffrey story. It's entertaining, touching, and compelling. And it's in her best known series.

If you've never read any of Anne McCaffrey's work, this story will open doors for you that will keep you reading her excellent fiction for decades to come.


* * *


Although Keevan lengthened his walking stride as far as his legs would stretch, he couldn't quite keep up with the other candidates. He knew he would be teased again.

Just as he knew many other things that his foster mother told him he ought not to know, Keevan knew that Beterli, the most senior of the boys, set that spanking pace just to embarrass him, the smallest dragonboy. Keevan would arrive, tail fork-end of the group, breathless, chest heaving, and maybe get a stem look from the instructing wing-second.

Dragonriders, even if they were still only hopeful candidates for the glowing eggs which were hardening on the hot sands of the Hatching Ground cavern, were expected to be punctual and prepared. Sloth was not tolerated by the Weyrleader of Benden Weyr. A good record was especially important now. It was very near hatching time, when the baby dragons would crack their mottled shells, and stagger forth to choose their lifetime companions. The very thought of that glorious moment made Keevan's breath catch in his throat. To be chosen--to be a dragonrider! To sit astride the neck of a winged beast with jeweled eyes: to be his friend, in telepathic communion with him for life; to be his companion in good times and fighting extremes; to fly effortlessly over the lands of Pern! Or, thrillingly, between to any point anywhere on the world! Flying between was done on dragonback or not at all, and it was dangerous.

Keevan glanced upward, past the black mouths of the weyr caves in which grown dragons and their chosen riders lived, toward the Star Stones that crowned the ridge of the old volcano that was Benden Weyr. On the height, the blue watch dragon, his rider mounted on his neck, stretched the great transparent pinions that carried him on the winds of Pern to fight the evil Thread that fell at certain times from the skies. The many-faceted rainbow jewels of his eyes glistened fleet-ingly in the greeny sun. He folded his great wings to his back, and the watch pair resumed their statuelike pose of alertness.

Then the enticing view was obscured as Keevan passed into the Hatching Ground cavern. The sands underfoot were hot, even through heavy wher-hide boots. How the bootmaker had protested having to sew so small! Keeven was forced to wonder why being small was reprehensible. People were always calling him "babe" and shooing him away as being "too small" or "too young" for this or that. Keevan was constantly working, twice as hard as any other boy his age, to prove himself capable. What if his muscles weren't as big as Beterli's? They were just as hard. And if he couldn't overpower anyone in a wrestling match, he could outdistance everyone in a footrace.

"Maybe if you run fast enough," Beterli had jeered on the occasion when Keevan had been goaded to boast of his swiftness, "you could catch a dragon. That's the only way you'll make a dragonrider!"

"You just wait and see, Beterli, you just wait," Keevan had replied. He would have liked to wipe the con-temptuous smile from Beterli's face, but the guy didn't fight fair even when a wingsecond was watching. "No one knows what Impresses a dragon!"

"They've got to be able to find you first, babe!"

Yes, being the smallest candidate was not an enviable position. It was therefore imperative that Keevan Impress a dragon in his first hatching. That would wipe the smile off every face in the cavern, and accord him the respect due any dragonrider, even the smallest one.

Besides, no one knew exactly what Impressed the baby dragons as they struggled from their shells in search of their lifetime partners.

"I like to believe that dragons see into a man's heart," Keevan's foster mother, Mende, told him. "If they find goodness, honesty, a flexible mind, patience, courage--and you've got that in quantity, dear Keevan--that's what dragons look for. I've seen many a well-grown lad left standing on the sands., Hatching Day, in favor of someone not so strong or tall or handsome. And if my memory serves me"--which it usually did: Mende knew every word of every Harper's tale worth telling, although Keevan did not interrupt her to say so--"I don't believe that F'lar, our Weyrleader, was all that tall when bronze Mnementh chose him. And Mnementh was the only bronze dragon of that hatching."

Dreams of Impressing a bronze were beyond Keevan's boldest reflections, although that goal dominated the thoughts of every other hopeful candidate. Green dragons were small and fast and more numerous. There was more prestige to Impressing a blue or brown than a green. Being practical, Keevan seldom dreamed as high as a big fighting brown, like Canth, F'nor's fine fellow, the biggest brown on all Pern. But to fly a bronze? Bronzes were almost as big as the queen, and only they took the air when a queen flew at mating time. A bronze rider could aspire to become Weyrleader! Well, Keevan would console himself, brown riders could aspire to become wingseconds, and that wasn't bad. He'd even settle for a green dragon: they were small, but so was he. No matter! He simply had to Impress a dragon his first time in the Hatching Ground. Then no one in the Weyr would taunt him anymore for being so small.

Shells, Keevan thought now, but the sands are hot!

"Impression time is imminent, candidates," the wingsecond was saying as everyone crowded respectfully close to him. "See the extent of the striations on this promising egg." The stretch marks were larger than yesterday.

Everyone leaned forward and nodded thoughtfully. That particular egg was the one Beterli had marked as his own, and no other candidate dared, on pain of being beaten by Beterli at his first opportunity, to approach it. The egg was marked by a large yellowish splotch in the shape of a dragon backwinging to land, talons outstretched to grasp rock. Everyone knew that bronze eggs bore distinctive markings. And naturally, Beterli, who'd been presented at eight Impressions already and was the biggest of the candidates, had chosen it.

"I'd say that the great opening day is almost upon us," the wingsecond went on, and then his face assumed a grave expression. "As we well know, there are only forty eggs and seventy-two candidates. Some of you may be disappointed on the great day. That doesn't necessarily mean you aren't dragonrider material, just that the dragon for you hasn't been shelled. You'll have other hatchings, and it's no disgrace to be left behind an Impression or two. Or more."

Keevan was positive that the wingsecond's eyes rested on Beterli, who'd been stood off at so many Impressions already. Keevan tried to squinch down so the wingsecond wouldn't notice him. Keevan had been reminded too often that he was eligible to be a candidate by one day only. He, of all the hopefuls, was most likely to be left standing on the great day. One more reason why he simply had to Impress at his first hatching.

"Now move about among the eggs," the wingsecond said. "Touch them. We don't know that it does any good, but it certainly doesn't do any harm."

Some of the boys laughed nervously, but everyone immediately began to circulate among the eggs. Berterli stepped up officiously to "his" egg, daring anyone to come near it. Keevan smiled, because he had already touched it--every inspection day, when the others were leaving the Hatching Ground and no one could see him crouch to stroke it.

Keevan had an egg he concentrated on, too, one drawn slightly to the far side of the others. The shell had a soft greenish-blue tinge with a faint creamy swirl design. The consensus was that this egg contained a mere green, so Keevan was rarely bothered by rivals. He was somewhat perturbed then to see Beterli wandering over to him.

"I don't know why you're allowed in this Impression, Keevan. There are enough of us without a babe," Beterli said, shaking his head.

"I'm of age." Keevan kept his voice level, telling himself not to be bothered by mere words.

"Yah!" Beterli made a show of standing in his toetips. "You can't even see over an egg; Hatching Day, you better get in front or the dragons won't see you at all. 'Course, you could get run down that way in the mad scramble. Oh, I forget, you can run fast, can't you?"

"You'd better make sure a dragon sees you, this time, Beterli," Keevan replied. "You're almost overage, aren't you?"

Beterli flushed and took a step forward, hand half-raised. Keevan stood his ground, but if Beterli advanced one more step, he would call the wingsecond. No one fought on the Hatching Ground. Surely Beterli knew that much.

Fortunately, at that moment, the wingsecond called the boys together and led them from the Hatching Ground to start on evening chores. There were "glows" to be replenished in the main kitchen caverns and sleeping cubicles, the major hallways, and the queen's apartment. Firestone sacks had to be filled against Thread attack, and black rock brought to the kitchen hearths. The boys fell to their chores, tantalized by the odors of roasting meat. The population of the Weyr began to assemble for the evening meal, and the drag-onriders came in from the Feeding Ground on their sweep checks.

It was the time of day Keevan liked best: once the chores were done but before dinner was served, a fellow could often get close enough to the dragonriders to hear their talk. Tonight, Keevan's father, K'last, was at the main dragonrider table. It puzzled Keevan how his father, a brown rider and a tall man, could be his father--because he, Keevan, was so small. It obviously puzzled K'last, too, when he deigned to notice his small son: "In a few more Turns, you'll be as tall as I am--or taller!"

K'last was pouring Benden wine all around the table. The dragonriders were relaxing. There'd be no Thread attack for three more days, and they'd be in the mood to tell tall tales, better than Harper yarns, about impossible maneuvers they'd done a-dragonback. When Thread attack was closer, their talk would change to a discussion of tactics of evasion, of going between, how long to suspend there until the burning but fragile Thread would freeze and crack and fall harmlessly off dragon and man. They would dispute the exact moment to feed firestone to the dragon so he'd have the best flame ready to sear Thread midair and render it harmless to ground--and man--below. There was such a lot to know and understand about being a dragonrider that sometimes Keevan was overwhelmed. How would he ever be able to remember everything he ought to know at the right moment? He couldn't dare ask such a question; this would only have given additional weight to the notion that he was too young yet to be a dragonrider.

"Having older candidates makes good sense," L'vel was saying, as Keevan settled down near the table. "Why waste four to five years of a dragon's fighting prime until his rider grows up enough to stand the rigors?" L'vel had Impressed a blue of Ramoth's first clutch. Most of the candidates thought L'vel was marvelous because he spoke up in front of the older riders, who awed them. "That was well enough in the Interval when you didn't need to mount the full Weyr complement to fight Thread. But not now. Not with more eligible candidates than ever. Let the babes wait."

"Any boy who is over twelve Turns has the right to stand in the Hatching Ground," K'last replied, a slight smile on his face. He never argued or got angry. Keevan wished he were more like his father. And oh, how he wished he were a brown rider! "Only a dragon--each particular dragon--knows what he wants in a rider. We certainly can't tell. Time and again the theorists," K'last's smile deepened as his eyes swept those at the table, "are surprised by dragon choice. They never seem to make mistakes, however."

"Now, K'last, just look at the roster this Impression. Seventy-two boys and only forty eggs. Drop off the twelve youngest, and there's still a good field for the hatchlings to choose from. Shells! There are a couple of weyrlings unable to see over a wher egg much less a dragon! And years before they can ride Thread."

"True enough, but the Weyr is scarcely under fighting strength, and if the youngest Impress, they'll be old enough to fight when the oldest of our current dragons go between from senility."

"Half the Weyr-bred lads have already been through several Impressions," one of the bronze riders said then. "I'd say drop some of them off this time. Give the untried a chance."

"There's nothing wrong in presenting a clutch with as wide a choice as possible," said the Weyrleader, who had joined the table with Lessa, the Weyrwoman.

"Has there ever been a case," she said, smiling in her odd way at the riders, "where a hatchling didn't choose?"

Her suggestion was almost heretical and drew astonished gasps from everyone, including the boys.

F'lar laughed. "You say the most outrageous things, Lessa."

"Well, has there ever been a case where a dragon didn't choose?"

"Can't say as I recall one," K'last replied.

"Then we continue in this tradition," Lessa said firmly, as if that ended the matter.

But it didn't. The argument ranged from one table to the other all through dinner, with some favoring a weeding out of the candidates to the most likely, lopping off those who were very young or who had had multiple opportunities to Impress. All the candidates were in a swivet, though such a departure from tradition would be to the advantage of many. As the evening progressed, more riders were favoring eliminating the youngest and those who'd passed four or more Impressions unchosen. Keevan felt he could bear such a dictum only if Beterli were also eliminated. But this seemed less likely than that Keevan would be turfed out, since the Weyr's need was for fighting dragons and riders.

By the time the evening meal was over, no decision had been reached, although the Weyrleader had promised to give the matter due consideration.

He might have slept on the problem, but few of the candidates did. Tempers were uncertain in the sleeping caverns next morning as the boys were routed out of their beds to carry water and black rock and cover the "glows." Twice Mende had to call Keevan to order for clumsiness.

"Whatever is the matter with you, boy?" she demanded in exasperation when he tipped blackrock short of the bin and sooted up the hearth.

"They're going to keep me from this Impression."

"What?" Mende stared at him. "Who?"

"You heard them talking at dinner last night. They're going to turf the babes from the hatching."

Mende regarded him a moment longer before touching his arm gently. "There's lots of talk around a supper table, Keevan. And it cools as soon as the supper. I've heard the same nonsense before every hatching, but nothing is ever changed."

"There's always a first time," Keevan answered, copying one of her own phrases.

"That'll be enough of that, Keevan. Finish your job. If the clutch does hatch today, we'll need full rock bins for the feast, and you won't be around to do the filling. All my fosterlings make dragonriders."

"The first time?" Keevan was bold enough to ask as he scooted off with the rockbarrow.

Perhaps, Keevan thought later, if he hadn't been on that chore just when Beterli was also fetching black rock, things might have turned out differently. But he had dutifully trundled the barrow to the outdoor bunker for another load just as Beterli arrived on a similar errand.

"Heard the news, babe?" Beterli asked. He was grinning from ear to ear, and he put an unnecessary emphasis on the final insulting word.

"The eggs are cracking?" Keevan all but dropped the loaded shovel. Several anxieties flicked through his mind then: he was black with rock dust--would he have time to wash before donning the white tunic of candidacy? And if the eggs were hatching, why hadn't the candidates been recalled by the wingsecond?

"Naw! Guess again!" Beterli was much too pleased with himself.

With a sinking heart, Keevan knew what the news must be, and he could only stare with intense desolation at the older boy.

"C'mon! Guess, babe!"

"I've no time for guessing games," Keevan managed to say with indifference. He began to shovel black rock into the barrow as fast as he could.

"I said, guess." Beterli grabbed the shovel.

"And I said I have no time for guessing games."

Beterli wrenched the shovel from Keevan's hands. "Guess!"

"I'll have that shovel back, Beterli." Keevan straightened up, but he didn't come to Beterli's bulky shoulder. From somewhere, other boys appeared, some with barrows, some mysteriously alerted to the prospect of a confrontation among their numbers.

"Babes don't give orders to candidates around here, babe!"

Someone sniggered and Keevan, incredulous, knew that he must've been dropped from the candidacy.

He yanked the shovel from Beterli's loosened grasp. Snarling, the older boy tried to regain possession, but Keevan clung with all his strength to the handle, dragged back and forth as the stronger boy jerked the shovel about.

With a sudden, unexpected movement, Beterli rammed the handle into Keevan's chest, knocking him over the barrow handles. Keevan felt a sharp, painful jab behind his left ear, an unbearable pain in his left shin, and then a painless nothingness.

Mende's angry voice roused him, and startled, he tried to throw back the covers, thinking he'd overslept. But he couldn't move, so firmly was he tucked into his bed. And then the constriction of a bandage on his head and the dull sickishness in his leg brought back recent occurrences.

"Hatching?" he cried.

"No, lovey," Mende said in a kind voice. Her hand was cool and gentle on his forehead. "Though there's some as won't be at any hatching again." Her voice took on a stern edge.

Keevan looked beyond her to see the Weyrwoman, who was frowning with irritation.

"Keevan, will you tell me what occurred at the black-rock bunker?" asked Lessa in an even voice.

He remembered Beterli now and the quarrel over the shovel and . . . what had Mende said about some not being at any hatching? Much as he hated Beterli, he couldn't bring himself to tattle on Beterli and force him out of candidacy.

"Come, lad," and a note of impatience crept into the Weyrwoman's voice. "I merely want to know what happened from you, too. Mende said she sent you for black rock. Beterli--and every Weyrling in the cavern--seems to have been on the same errand. What happened?"

"Beterli took my shovel. I hadn't finished with it."

"There's more than one shovel. What did he say to you?"

"He'd heard the news."

"What news?" The Weyrwoman was suddenly amused.

"That . . . that . . . there'd been changes."

"Is that what he said?"

"Not exactly"

"What did he say? C'mon, lad, I've heard from everyone else, you know."

"He said for me to guess the news."

"And you fell for that old gag?" The Weyrwoman's irritation returned.

"Consider all the talk last night at supper, Lessa," Mende said. "Of course the boy would think he'd been eliminated."

"In effect, he is, with a broken skull and leg." Lessa touched his arm in a rare gesture of sympathy. "Be that as it may, Keevan, you'll have other Impressions. Beterli will not. There are certain rules that must be observed by all candidates, and his conduct proves him unacceptable to the Weyr."

She smiled at Mende and then left.

"I'm still a candidate?" Keevan asked urgently.

"Well, you are and you aren't, lovey," his foster mother said. "Is the numbweed working?" she asked, and when he nodded, she said, "You just rest. I'll bring you some nice broth."

At any other time in his life, Keevan would have relished such cosseting, but now he just lay there worrying. Beterli had been dismissed. Would the others think it was his fault? But everyone was there! Beterli provoked that fight. His worry increased, because although he heard excited comings and goings in the passageway, no one tweaked back the curtain across the sleeping alcove he shared with five other boys. Surely one of them would have to come in sometime. No, they were all avoiding him. And something else was wrong. Only he didn't know what.

Mende returned with broth and beachberry bread. "Why doesn't anyone come see me, Mende? I haven't done anything wrong, have I? I didn't ask to have Beterli turfed out."

Mende soothed him, saying everyone was busy with noontime chores and no one was angry with him. They were giving him a chance to rest in quiet. The numbweed made him drowsy, and her words were fair enough. He permitted his fears to dissipate. Until he heard a hum. Actually, he felt it first, in the broken shin bone and his sore head. The hum began to grow. Two things registered suddenly in Keevan's groggy mind: the only white candidate's robe still on the pegs in the chamber was his; and the dragons hummed when a clutch was being laid or being hatched. Impression! And he was flat abed.

Bitter, bitter disappointment turned the warm broth sour in his belly. Even the small voice telling him that he'd have other opportunities failed to alleviate his crushing depression. This was the Impression that mattered! This was his chance to show everyone, from Mende to K'last to L'vel and even the Weyrleader that he, Keevan, was worthy of being a dragonrider.

He twisted in bed, fighting against the tears that threatened to choke him. Dragonmen don't cry! Dragonmen learn to live with pain.

Pain? The leg didn't actually pain him as he rolled about on his bedding. His head felt sort of stiff from the tightness of the bandage. He sat up, an effort in itself since the numbweed made exertion difficult. He touched the splinted leg; the knee was unhampered. He had no feeling in his bone, really. He swung himself carefully to the side of his bed and stood slowly. The room wanted to swim about him. He closed his eyes, which made the dizziness worse, and he had to clutch the wall.

Gingerly, he took a step. The broken leg dragged. It hurt in spite of the numbweed, but what was pain to a dragonman?

No one had said he couldn't go to the Impression. "You are and you aren't," were Mende's exact words.

Clinging to the wall, he jerked off his bedshirt. Stretching his arm to the utmost, he jerked his white candidate's tunic from the peg. Jamming first one arm and then the other into the holes, he pulled it over his head. Too bad about the belt. He couldn't wait. He hobbled to the door, hung on to the curtain to steady himself. The weight on his leg was unwieldy. He wouldn't get very far without something to lean on. Down by the bathing pool was one of the long crooknecked poles used to retrieve clothes from the hot washing troughs. But it was down there, and he was on the level above. And there was no one nearby to come to his aid: everyone would be in the Hatching Ground right now, eagerly waiting for the first egg to crack.

The humming increased in volume and tempo, an urgency to which Keevan responded, knowing that his time was all too limited if he was to join the ranks of the hopeful boys standing around the cracking eggs. But if he hurried down the ramp, he'd fall flat on his face.

He could, of course, go flat on his rear end, the way crawling children did. He sat down, sending a jarring stab of pain through his leg and up to the wound on the back of his head. Gritting his teeth and blinking away tears, Keevan scrabbled down the ramp. He had to wait a moment at the bottom to catch his breath. He got to one knee, the injured leg straight out in front of him. Somehow, he managed to push himself erect, though the room seemed about to tip over his ears. It wasn't far to the crooked stick, but it seemed an age before he had it in his hand.

Then the humming stopped!

Keevan cried out and began to hobble frantically across the cavern, out to the bowl of the Weyr. Never had the distance between living caverns and the Hatching Ground seemed so great. Never had the Weyr been so breathlessly silent. It was as if the multitude of people and dragons watching the hatching held every breath in suspense. Not even the wind muttered down the steep sides of the bowl. The only sounds to break the stillness were Keevan's ragged gasps and the thump-thud of his stick on the hard-packed ground. Sometimes he had to hop twice on his good leg to maintain his balance. Twice he fell into the sand and had to pull himself up on the stick, his white tunic no longer spotless. Once he jarred himself so badly he couldn't get up immediately.

Then he heard the first exhalation of the crowd, the oohs, the muted cheer, the susurrus of excited whispers. An egg had cracked, and the dragon had chosen his rider. Desperation increased Keevan's hobble. Would he never reach the arching mouth of the Hatching Ground?

Another cheer and an excited spate of applause spurred Keevan to greater effort. If he didn't get there in moments, there'd be no unpaired hatchling left. Then he was actually staggering into the Hatchling Ground, the sands hot on his bare feet.

No one noticed his entrance or his halting progress. And Keevan could see nothing but the backs of the white-robed candidates, seventy of them ringing the area around the eggs. Then one side would surge forward or back and there'd be a cheer. Another dragon had been Impressed. Suddenly a large gap appeared in the white human wall, and Keevan had his first sight of the eggs. There didn't seem to be any left uncracked, and he could see the lucky boys standing beside wobble-legged dragons. He could hear the unmistakable plaintive crooning of hatchlings and their squawks of protest as they'd fall awkwardly in the sand.

Suddenly he wished that he hadn't left his bed, that he'd stayed away from the Hatching Ground. Now everyone would see his ignominious failure. So he scrambled as desperately to reach the shadowy walls of the Hatching Ground as he had struggled to cross the bowl. He mustn't be seen.

He didn't notice, therefore, that the shifting group of boys remaining had begun to drift in his direction. The hard pace he had set himself and his cruel disappointment took their double toll of Keevan. He tripped and collapsed sobbing to the warm sands. He didn't see the consternation in the watching Weyrfolk above the Hatching Ground, nor did he hear the excited whispers of speculation. He didn't know that the Weyrleader and Weyrwoman had dropped to the arena and were making their way toward the knot of boys slowly moving in the direction of the entrance.

"Never seen anything like it," the Weyrleader was saying. "Only thirty-nine riders chosen. And the bronze trying to leave the Hatching Ground without making Impression."

"A case in point of what I said last night," the Weyrwoman replied, "where a hatchling makes no choice because the right boy isn't there."

"There's only Beterli and K'last's young one missing. And there's a full wing of likely boys to choose from. . ."

"None acceptable, apparently. Where is the creature going? He's not heading for the entrance after all. Oh, what have we there, in the shadows?"

Keevan heard with dismay the sound of voices nearing him. He tried to burrow into the sand. The mere thought of how he would be teased and taunted now was unbearable.

Don't worry! Please don't worry! The thought was urgent, but not his own.

Someone kicked sand over Keevan and butted roughly against him.

"Go away. Leave me alone!" he cried.

Why? was the injured-sounding question inserted into his mind. There was no voice, no tone, but the question was there, perfectly clear, in his head.

Incredulous, Keevan lifted his head and stared into the glowing jeweled eyes of a small bronze dragon. His wings were wet, the tips drooping in the sand. And he sagged in the middle on his unsteady legs, although he was making a great effort to keep erect.

Keevan dragged himself to his knees, oblivious of the pain in his leg. He wasn't even aware that he was ringed by the boys passed over, while thirty-one pairs of resentful eyes watched him Impress the dragon. The Weyrmen looked on, amused, and surprised at the draconic choice, which could not be forced. Could not be questioned. Could not be changed.

Why? asked the dragon again. Don't you like me? His eyes whirled with anxiety, and his tone was so piteous that Keevan staggered forward and threw his arms around the dragon's neck, stroking his eye ridges, patting the damp, soft hide, opening the fragile-looking wings to dry them, and wordlessly assuring the hatchling over and over again that he was the most perfect, most beautiful, most beloved dragon in the Weyr, in all the Weyrs of Pern.

"What's his name, K'van?" asked Lessa, smiling warmly at the new dragonrider. K'van stared up at her for a long moment. Lessa would know as soon as he did. Lessa was the only person who could "receive" from all dragons, not only her own Ramoth. Then he gave her a radiant smile, recognizing the traditional shortening of his name that raised him forever to the rank of dragonrider.

My name is Heth, the dragon thought mildly, then hiccuped in sudden urgency. I'm hungry.

"Dragons are born hungry," said Lessa, laughing. "F'lar, give the boy a hand. He can barely manage his own legs, much less a dragon's."

K'van remembered his stick and drew himself up. "We'll be Just fine, thank you."

"You may be the smallest dragonrider ever, young K'van," Flar said, "but you're one of the bravest!"

And Heth agreed! Pride and joy so leaped in both chests that K'van wondered if his heart would burst right out of his body. He looped an arm around Heth's neck and the pair, the smallest dragonboy and the hatchling who wouldn't choose anybody else, walked out of the Hatching Ground together forever.

